Creativity and tolerance of ambiguity: an empirical
study
Franck Zenasni, Maud Besançon, Todd Lubart

To cite this version:
Franck Zenasni, Maud Besançon, Todd Lubart. Creativity and tolerance of ambiguity: an
empirical study. Journal of Creative Behavior, Creative Education Foundation, 2008, 42 (1),
pp.61-72.

HAL Id: hal-01392571
https://hal-univ-paris10.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01392571
Submitted on 9 Nov 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

A relation between tolerance of ambiguity and creativity has often been
proposed but empirical studies are rare. Tolerance/intolerance of ambiguity is
generally considered to be a personality trait that corresponds to the way in which
an individual tends to perceive and deal with ambiguous situations or stimuli
(Furnham, 1994; Furnham & Avison, 1997; Furnham & Ribchester, 1995;
Stoycheva, 1998, 2003). Individuals who are tolerant of ambiguity like ambiguous situations, or at least can live with them for some time (MacDonald, 1970).
People who are intolerant of ambiguity feel constrained, anxious or tense in
ambiguous situations. Vernon (1970) considered tolerance of ambiguity to be a
sine qua non factor of creativity. Vernon (1970) explained that tolerance of
ambiguity favors creative thinking and behaviors because it enables individuals
to not be satisfied by partial or non-optimal solutions to complex problems. People
who tolerate ambiguity may be able to work effectively on a larger set of stimuli
or situations, including ambiguous ones, whereas intolerant individuals willavoid
or quickly stop treating such information. In fact, tolerance of ambiguity allows
individuals to optimize creative potential, which is not blocked due to unsolved
ambiguity.
Other authors have suggested that the more individuals tolerate ambiguity,
the more they are creative (Barron & Harrington, 1981; Golann, 1963; Sternberg
& Lubart, 1995; Urban, 2003). This hypothesis is based on the idea that situations requiring creative thinking often involve ambiguity. The more a person can
tolerate ambiguous objects, the more the person can deal with them. Thus, tolerance of ambiguity willallow individuals to continue to grapple with complex problems, to remain open, and increase the probability of finding a novel solution. For
Stoycheva (1998, 2003), tolerance of ambiguity is linked to creativity because
ambiguity-tolerant individuals are able to accept feelings of anxiety and psychological discomfort naturally provoked by ambiguity associated with new, difficult
situations. Additionally based on Urban's (2003) components model of creativity, tolerance of ambiguity is believed to contribute to the creative process
because it empowers the intrinsically motivated exploration of novel, unusual or
complex stimuli.
In spite of these theoretical proposals, empirical research has rarely tested the
relations between tolerance for ambiguity and creativity. In 1990, Tegano, using
the Tolerance of Ambiguity Scale (AT-20,Mac Donald, 1970) observed a positive
correlation (r = .31, p < .05) between early educators' tolerance of ambiguity and
their MBTI creative style score. Furnham and Avison (1997) observed a significant link between tolerance of ambiguity and preference for surrealistic paintings. These results suggest a positive relation between tolerance of ambiguity
and some aspects of creative behaviors: the Myers-Briggs Inventory evaluates
some characteristics linked to creativity but not creative production itself, and the
preference for surrealistic paintings is only a partial aspect of creative attitudes.
These studies are demonstrative but include specific measurements more related

EMPIRICAL STUDY
METHOD
Participants

Sixty-eight French volunteer participants consisting of 34 pairs of adolescents
and their parents, took part in this study. Adolescents ranged in age from 11to 17
(mean age = 15,85; SD = 1.61). There were 14 girls and 20 boys. Parents ranged
in age from 39 to 61 (mean age = 48,31; SD = 4.71). There were 28 mothers and
6 fathers. All participants were volunteers, recruited by announcements made by
university students to families with secondary school students. Adolescents had
to indicate which parent spent the most time and knew him or her best. Then, this
parent was requested to participate. Among these 34 dyads, 17 were mixed (14
mother/son and 3 father/daughter) and 17were non mixed (14 mother/daughter
and 3 father/son).
The study was described as focusing on relations between personality and
problem solving. Participants provided informed consent, did not receive any
payment and were debriefed fully after completing the session.

Measures of creativity

In order to examine distinct facets of creativity we used three independent
measures of creativity: a divergent thinking task, a story-writing task and selfevaluation of creative attitudes and behavior. Because these tasks already vary in
terms of type of measurements, we decided to focus on the same type of production (Le. verbal) in order to limit differences between tasks.
The divergent thinking task was based on the generation of ideas concerning
an ambiguous stimulus. This stimulus was selected during a pre-test in which
68 adults judged the ambiguity of a large set (n = 89) of stimuli (both imagesand verbal material). Participants used a five-point Likert scale (from 1 "not
ambiguous" to 5 "very ambiguous") to evaluate the degree of ambiguity of each
stimulus. There was good inter-judge agreement (a = .93 and mean r between
judges = .29). The selected stimulus - an ambiguous text - showed a high level
of ambiguity (mean = 4.06) and a relatively good degree of consensus between
judges' ratings (SD = 1.09).
For the divergent thinking task, participants had to "write as many titles as
possible for the ambiguous text". They had to generate original titles different
from those that others may produce. To measure performance, three scores were
examined for each participant: (1) fluency (raw number of relevant responses),
(2) originality, and (3) unicity (number of unique ideas generated). The evaluation of the originality score was based on the frequency of the occurrence of
ideas in the whole sample. We used the additive method proposed by Runco,
Okuda and Thurston (1987). In this technique, the relative frequency of each
idea in a sample is computed, so that each response can be attributed a
score between 1/N (unique ideas in a sample of N participants) and N/N = 1

Stoycheva (1998, 2003), in order to evaluate adolescents' and parents'
responses to uncertainty in life, constructed the Behaviour Scale of Tolerance/
Intolerance of Ambiguity (BSTIA). To create this measure, a large sample of behavioral characteristics indicative or contraindicative of AT was compiled from
the research literature. Fourteen items (7 referring to intolerance-of-ambiguity
behaviors and 7 items referring to tolerance-of-ambiguity behaviors) which
are thematically related were retained based on experts' evaluations and social
desirability (Stoycheva, 1998, 2003). For this final questionnaire, subjects used
a five-point Ukert scale (from 1 "behavior usually encouraged" to 5 "behavior
rarely encouraged") for each iteml. Three scores are calculated: a tolerance score,
an intolerance score and a global score. A high global score indicates that an
individual is intolerant of ambiguity. Original data concerning this scale (Stoycheva
1998) indicate that coefficients of internal consistency of these scales range from
.62 to .74. Internal reliabilities of these scales for the present study will be presented in the results section.
Procedure

Participants provided informed written consent. Then, the divergent thinking
task was completed during 10 minutes. After a 5-minute break, each participant
completed the story-writing task. Fifteen minutes was allowed to write the story.
Finally, participants completed the Adjective Check Ust, the Measurement of
Ambiguity Tolerance, and then the Behavior Scale of Tolerance/Intolerance for
Ambiguity. Note that for all participants a list of definitions for difficult words
from the Adjective Check-Ust was available during completion of the task. Moreover, the investigators were available to answer questions during the testing procedure. Participants were allowed to complete the last questionnaires at their own
pace. Debriefing information was provided
RESULTS
First, we provide analyses concerning the creativity measures. Descriptive
analyses, links between distinct measures of creativity, and relations of between
parents' and children's creativity are presented. Next, the same kinds of analyses
are presented for tolerance of ambiguity measures. In a third section,
relations between creativity and tolerance of ambiguity are examined. Because
of multi testing, we may consider for all the statistical tests a stricter p value than
usual (p = .01). For correlational analyses all effect sizes will be discussed
according to Cohen's criteria (Cohen, 1988): r <10.1/: no relationship;
[10.11- < 10.31]: weak relationship; [10.31- < 10.51]: moderate relationship;
[ I 0.51- < 10.71]: strong relationship; [> 10.71]: very strong relationship.
ANALYSIS OF CREATIVITY MEASURES
Descriptive analyses of the different creativity scores are presented in Table 1.
1

Note that the ACL and BSTIA's scales have in common the term "original". Potential correlation between
these two measurements
could be particularly influenced by this one common term.

Creative profile measured by the ACL does not correlate with divergent
thinking and story writing scores (all p value> .05). As expected, the number of
unique ideas is linked to fluency and originality (r = .75 and r = .56, p '" .001
respectively). Principal Component Factor analysis indicates a 2 factor solution
(Kaiser criterion) explaining 63.8% of the variance. After a Varimax rotation,
the two factors accounted for 34.9% and 31% of variance respectively. Fluency
and the ACL creative score loaded on the first factor. Mean originality and story
writing creativity ratings loaded on the second factor. The number of unique ideas
loaded on both factors. These results suggest that divergent thinking, ACL
creative score and story writing represents partially distinct facets of creativity.
To examine relations between creativity of parents and creativity of their children, we conducted correlational analyses. Results indicate that mean originality
of parents is moderately linked to mean originality of their children (r = .46, p =
.008)). Moreover, results indicate that the more the parents have a higher ACL
creative score, the more their children also report one (r = .50, p = .004). The
fluency, uniqueness of ideas, and story creativity of parents are not correlated
with that of adolescents (r = .16, r = .06, r = .06 respectively). Also we calculated
a canonical correlation to examine the overall relation between all creativity measures for parents and for adolescents. Results indicate a significant canonical
correlation between the two sets of variables (Rc = .74, Chj2 (25) = 41.44 p '" .05).
The more parents are creative, the more their children tend to be as well. The
results of this canonical correlation should be considered tentative, however,
because our sample is relatively small for this kind of analysis (reliable estimates
require N = 20* the number of variables; Stevens, 1986).
ANALYSIS OF TOLERANCE OF AMBIGUITY SCALES
Descriptive analyses of the different tolerance of ambiguity scales are summarized in Table 3.
Including all participants, analyses indicate that the 27-item version of the MAT
presents a satisfactory internal consistency (a = .71). For adults, the tolerance
and the intolerance of ambiguity scales of the BSTIA also present satisfactory
internal consistencies (a = .75 and .81 respectively). Internal consistency of the
total scale is good (a = .86). For adolescents, all the scales of the BSTIA present
low internal reliabilities (a = .56 and .57 for the tolerance and the intolerance
scale, and a = .61 for the total scale.)
Correlational analyses (see table 4) indicate that intolerance of ambiguity evaluated by the MATis moderately and significantly linked to intolerance of ambiguity and tolerance of ambiguity measured by the BSTIA (r = .33 and r = -.44,
p'" .01 respectively). It is also moderately linked to the global score of intolerance
of ambiguity of the BSTIA (r = .46, p '" .001). Note that tolerance and intolerance
for ambiguity scores from the BSTIA are correlated (r = -.42, p '" .001). Factor
analysis yields a one-factor solution (56.55% of variance), in which intolerance of
ambiguity measured by the MATand the BSTIA are opposed to the dimension
tolerance of ambiguity measured by the BSTIA.

RELATION BETWEEN TOLERANCE OF AMBIGUITY AND CREATIVITY
First we analyze relationships between tolerance of ambiguity and creativity
for the total sample (parents and adolescents). Correlations are presented in
table 5.

Intolerance
of
Ambiguity
(MAT)

Tolerance
of
Ambiguity
(BSTlA)

Intolerance
Total
Intolerance
of
Ambiguity of Ambiguity
(BSTlA)
(BSTIA)

Fluency

-.38*

.36*

-.36*

-.42**

Originality

-.25

.12

.20

.04

Uniqueness

-.36*

.28

-.16

-.26

Story creativity

-.26

.14

-.10

-.20

Creative personality

-.38*

.08

-.25

-.14

The results indicate that fluency is moderately and significantly linked to all
scores of tolerance/intolerance of ambiguity (p < .01). The more individuals
tolerate ambiguity, the more they generated ideas in a divergent thinking task
involving an ambiguous stimulus. The number of unique ideas is also significantly linked to intolerance of ambiguity measured by the MAT. Relations of
tolerance of ambiguity and other creativity facets are less obvious and do not
reach a p < .01. However, we may note that all these correlations present the
same tendency: it appears that the more individuals are intolerant of ambiguity
(measured by the MAT), the less they generated original and unique ideas, the
less they produced creative stories and the lower they scored on the adjective
checklist measure.
Canonical analyses indicate that the set of creativity scores shared a significant part of variance with tolerance of ambiguity variables (MAT and BSTIA
total scores) (Rc = .57, F(8,116) = 4.20, P < .001).
These results support our first hypothesis that the more individuals tolerate
ambiguity, the more they tend to be creative.
To complete the examination of relations between tolerance of ambiguity
and creativity, we calculated correlations between parents' tolerance of ambiguity and adolescent's creativity. There were no significant relations. Even though
creativity of adolescents may be related to the creativity of their parents, it is
not significantly related to parents' tolerance of ambiguity.

ALBERT,

R. (1992).

Genius and Eminence. New York: Pergamon.

BARRON, E, & HARRINGTON,
Psychology, 32, 439-476.
COHEN, J. (1988).

D. M. (1981). Creativity, intelligence,

Annual Review of

and personality.

Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, Erlbaum

COMADENA, M. E. (1984). Brainstorming
groups: Ambiguity tolerance, communication,
task attraction, and individual productivity. Small Group Behavior, 15, 251-264.

apprehension,

CSIKSENTMIHALYI, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. New
York: Harper Collins.
FURNHAM, A. (1994). A content correlational
and factor analytic study of four tolerance
questionnaires.
Personality and Individual Differences, 16(3),403-410.
FURNHAM, A. & AVISON, M. (1997). Personality
Individual Differences, 1997; 23, 923-935.
FURNHAM, A., & RIBCHESTER,
measurement
and applications.
GOLANN, S. E. (1963).

Psychological

GOUGH, H., & GENDRE, F. (1982).
Psychologie Appliquee, Paris

and preference

for surreal

T. (1995). Tolerance
of ambiguity:
Current Psychology, 14, 179-199.
study of creativity.

paintings.

A review

of ambiguity

Personality and

of the concept,

its

Psychological Bulletin, 60, 548-565.

Manuel de la Liste d'Adjectifs ACL. Les Editions

du Centre

de

KERR, B. & CHOPP, C. (1999). Families and creativity. In M.A. Runco, & S.R. Pritzker (Eds.), Encyclopedia
of creativity (pp.709-715).
New York: Academic Press.
(Ed.), Thinking and problem solving (pp. 289-332).

LUBART, T.!. (1994). Creativity. In R. J. Sternberg
New York: Academic Press.
LUBART, T.I, MOUCHIROUD,
[Psychology of creativity].
MAcDONALD A. P. (1970).
Reports, 26, 791-798.

c., TORDJMAN,
Paris: Armand

S., & ZENASNI, E (2003). La Psychologie de la Creativite
Colin.

Revised scale for ambiguity

tolerance:

reliability and validity. Psychological

MOUCHIROUD, c., & LUBART, T. (2001). Children's original thinking: An empirical examination
of
alternative measures derived from divergent thinking tasks. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 162,
382-401.
NORTON R. W. (1975). Measurement
607-612.

of ambiguity

Journal of Personality Assessment, 39,

tolerance.

RUNCO, M. A., OKUDA, S. M., & THURSTON, B. J. (1987). The psychometric
properties of four systems
for scoring divergent thinking tests. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 5(2), 149-156.
RUNCO, M. A. (1991). Divergent thinking. Westport,

CT, US: Ablex Publishing.

RUNCO, M. A., & ALBERT S. R., (2005). Parent's personality
gifted boys. Creative Research Journal, 17(4), 355-367.

and creative

potential

of exceptionally

STERNBERG, R. J., & LUBART, T.!. (1995). Defying the'crowd: Cultivating creativity in a culture of
conformity. New York: Free Press.
STEVENS,

J. (1986). Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

STOYCHEVA, K. (1998). Ambiguity Tolerance: Adolescents'Responses
report (ERIC) Document Reproduction
Service No. ED 422 547).
STOYTCHEVA,

K. (2003).

Tolerance of ambiguity.

TEGANO, D. W. (1990). Relationship
Reports, 66, 1047-1056.

oftolerance

to Uncertainty

in Life. Research

Pleven: Lege Artis (in Bulgaria)

of ambiguity

and playfulness

to creativity. Psychological

URBAN, K. K. (2003). Toward a Componential
Model of Creativity. In D. Ambrose,
Tannenbaum
(Eds.). Creative Intelligence: Toward Theoretic Integration.
Cresskill, NJ.

L. M. Cohen, & A.J.
Hampton Press Inc:

