The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0268-3946.htm

JMP
25,8

Defining the content domain of
intercultural competence for
global leaders

810

Allan Bird

Received September 2008
Revised August 2009
Accepted October 2009

Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Mark Mendenhall
College of Business Administration, University of Tennessee-Chattanooga,
Chattanooga, Tennessee, USA

Michael J. Stevens
Goddard School of Business and Economics, Weber State University,
Ogden, Utah, USA

Gary Oddou
College of Business Administration, California State University, San Marcos,
San Marcos, California, USA
Abstract
Purpose – Research on expatriation and global leadership has been characterized by wide variations
in defining what constitutes intercultural competence. Greater progress can be achieved if a
comprehensive definition of the intercultural competence domain can be established, particularly with
regard to the specific context of global leadership. This paper aims to focus on the issues.
Design/methodology/approach – The authors conduct an extensive review of the global
leadership and expatriation literatures, integrating and synthesizing prior theoretical and empirical
efforts to develop a comprehensive domain definition for intercultural competence in the context of
global leadership.
Findings – The domain of intercultural competence in the context of global leadership comprised
three dimensions – perception management, relationship management and self management. Each
dimension is characterized by facets that further delineate aspects of intercultural competence.
Research limitations/implications – The domain definition of intercultural competence for global
leadership appears to be well supported in prior theoretical and empirical work focusing on
expatriation and global leadership; however that work was fragmented in nature. A test of the
comprehensive model, i.e. all three dimensions and 17 facets, is called for, as well as the validation of
an instrument that measures them.
Originality/value – The paper integrates and synthesizes the extensive body of theoretical and
empirical work related to intercultural competence and clearly establishes the content domain, thereby
enhancing the efficacy of future theoretical and empirical efforts.
Keywords Leadership, Human resource management, Multinational companies,
Cross-cultural management
Paper type Conceptual paper
Journal of Managerial Psychology
Vol. 25 No. 8, 2010
pp. 810-828
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0268-3946
DOI 10.1108/02683941011089107

Intercultural competence is increasingly necessary in today’s global workplace as
collaborative and coordinating demands increasingly stretch leaders’ capacities to
perceive, interpret and act in ways that achieve organizational goals. Since the early

1990s, an increasing number of scholars have been studying effective global leaders
and attempting to delineate the competencies that are critical to their success. Reviews
of this literature (Bird and Osland, 2004; Jokinen, 2005; Mendenhall, 2001; Mendenhall
and Osland, 2002a, b; Osland, 2008; Osland et al., n.d., in press) find that social
scientists have delineated over fifty competencies that influence global leadership
effectiveness; however, many of these competencies overlap conceptually and are often
separated only by semantic differences (Jokinen, 2005; Osland, 2008).
Greater clarity can be brought to the study of global leadership by delineating the
specific content domain of constructs identified as essential to it. Progress in
delineating the relationship of intercultural competence to global leadership
effectiveness and performance is presently hampered due to varying
conceptualizations of the content domain of intercultural competence, particularly
with regard to the context of global leadership. In this paper, we will review the
empirical findings from the global leadership and expatriation literatures related to
intercultural competence and present a comprehensive formulation of intercultural
competence.
Defining intercultural competence and global leadership
Perhaps because it has been widely addressed across a range of disciplines – from
psychology to international management to education, to name a few – intercultural
competency has been broadly defined as the ability to function effectively in another
culture (see Dinges and Baldwin, 1996; Gertsen, 1990). As Deardorff (2004) notes, there
is widespread disparity in delineating what specifically comprises intercultural
competence. In their review of literature, Chen and Starosta (1996) point out that it is
often described as involving affective, cognitive and behavioral perspectives.
Leiba-O’Sullivan (1999) further distinguishes between stable and dynamic
competencies, noting that the former are stable and enduring, while the latter are
more susceptible to development through training. Dynamic competencies are also
highly context- and task-dependent. Within this paper we retain the broad definition
and define the relevant content domain in terms of stable competencies, which are also
often defined in terms of personality traits or predispositions.
The definition of global leadership is similarly challenging. As both Jokinen (2005)
and Osland (2008) point out in their review of global leadership research, distinctions
between domestic and global leadership and between global managers and global
leaders consistently emerge as central issues. Osland (2008) suggests, and we adopt, a
definition of global leadership as “the process of influencing the thinking, attitudes,
and behaviors of a global community to work together synergistically toward a
common vision and common goal”. This definition applies not only to individuals in
clearly identifiable leadership positions, but to anyone whose effective role involves
this process.
A review of the global leadership and expatriation literatures
Mendenhall and Osland (2002a, b) categorized the global leadership literature as
exhibiting six core dimensions of competencies, with numerous facets within each
dimension (see Table I).
When they subsequently compared the dimensions of global leadership and
attendant competencies to the literature of expatriate effectiveness, they found

Defining the
content domain

811

Table I.
The terrain of global
leadership constructs
Courage
Commitment
Hardiness
Maturity
Results-orientation
Personal literacy

Conflict management

Negotiation expertise

Empowering others

Managing cross-cultural
ethical issues
Social literacy

Cultural literacy

Global business
expertise

Global business
Team building
savvy
Global
Continuity building
organizational savvy
Thinking agility
Business acumen
Organizational
networking
Improvisation
Stakeholder
Creating learning
orientation
systems
Pattern recognition External orientation Architecting and
designing
Cognitive
Results-orientation
Global networking
complexity
Cosmopolitanism
Strong customer
orientation
Managing
Business literacy
uncertainty
Local vs global
Change agentry
paradoxes
Behavioral
flexibility

Environmental
scanning
Global mindset

Source: Adapted from Mendenhall and Osland (2002b)

Tenacity
Emotional
intelligence

Accountability
Integrity

Inquisitiveness and
curiosity
Continual learner

Cross-cultural
communication skills
Ability to emotionally
connect
Inspire, motivate others

Building relationships

Cognitive
orientation

Catalyst for strategic change

Catalyst for cultural change

Entrepreneurial spirit

Articulating a tangible vision
and strategy
Envisioning

Global business competencies
Macro level
Global organizing
expertise
Visioning

812

Intercultural competencies
Person/group level
Cross-cultural relationship
skills
Traits and values

JMP
25,8

significant overlap between three of the competency domains of global leadership that
relate specifically to intercultural effectiveness and competencies that are important to
living and working in a foreign country as an expatriate ( Jokinen, 2005; Mendenhall,
2001; Mendenhall and Osland, 2002a, b; Osland et al., 2006; Osland, 2008). The six
dimensions can be conceptually divided between those that involve competencies
directly related to intercultural interaction at the person and small group level (which
are critical to expatriate effectiveness and global leadership), and those that involve the
mastery of more macro, global business knowledge and skills. All the reviews agree
that a major dimension of global leadership involves the mastery of intercultural
competencies ( Jokinen, 2005; Mendenhall, 2001; Mendenhall and Osland, 2002a, b;
Osland et al., 2006; Osland, 2008). However, none of the reviews to date are able to
definitively delineate which intercultural competencies form the nomological net in
terms of their valence and cogence to manifestations of effective global leadership.
Review of the expatriation literature
Because the reviews of global leadership competencies clearly indicated a strong
overlap with the expatriate adjustment competency domain when it comes to
intercultural effectiveness, we analyzed reviews of the empirical expatriate adjustment
literature since 1984 (Arthur and Bennett, 1995; Bhaskar-Shrinivas et al., 2005; Dinges
and Baldwin, 1996; Gertsen, 1990; Harrison et al., 2004; Hechanova et al., 2003; Jordan
and Cartwright, 1998; Kealey, 1996; Mendenhall et al., 2002; Mendenhall and Oddou,
1985; Mol et al., 2005; Oddou and Mendenhall, 1984; Ones and Viswesvaran, 1997;
Ronen, 1989; Stahl, 2001; Thomas, 1998; Thomas and Lazarova, 2006) to evaluate their
assessment of the state of the field. Additionally, we have included empirical studies
that were not included in the aforementioned reviews or that were published after the
appearance of these reviews. To assess the empirical literature of the global leadership
field, we analyzed the most prominent reviews of that literature to date (Jokinen, 2005;
Mendenhall, 2001; Mendenhall and Osland, 2002a, b; Osland, 2008; Osland et al., n.d.).
Expatriate adjustment competencies
The ability to adjust to the work, social, and general cultural dimensions of a new
culture has been shown to influence subsequent productivity in an overseas
assignment (Kraimer et al., 2001; Harrison and Shaffer, 2005). Successful expatriate
adjustment predicts task completion and relationship building effectiveness during the
overseas assignment (Harrison and Shaffer, 2005), thus an understanding of what
competencies influence expatriate adjustment is critical to an understanding of
enhancing individual performance in the global workplace.
Mendenhall and Oddou (1985) undertook a review and categorization of
competencies associated with expatriate adjustment. They found that factors
influencing expatriate adjustment could be grouped into one of three categories: the
self-oriented dimension, the others-oriented dimension, and the perceptual dimension.
The self-oriented dimension includes “activities and attributes that serve to
strengthen the expatriate’s self-esteem, self-confidence, and mental hygiene”
Mendenhall and Oddou (1985, pp. 40, 41, 42). The others-oriented dimension
includes “activities and attributes that enhance the expatriate’s ability to interact
effectively with host-nationals”, while the perceptual dimension contains cognitive
processes that facilitate an expatriate’s “ability to understand why foreigners behave

Defining the
content domain

813

JMP
25,8

814

the way they do”, thus enhancing their “ability to make correct attributions about the
reasons or causes of host-nationals’ behavior”).
This categorization has been), in part, the basis for the most rigorously tested,
influential and robust model of expatriate adjustment in the field, the international
adjustment model (IA). The IA model was developed by Black et al. (1991) and
comprehensive reviews and empirical validation of this model have been conducted by
Bhaskar-Shrinivas et al. (2005), Hechanova et al. (2003) Mendenhall et al. (2002) and
Shaffer et al. (1999).
In the IA model Mendenhall and Oddou’s (1985) earlier categories were renamed:
self-orientation became self-efficacy, reflecting the degree to which an individual
believes he or she has the ability to succeed in new tasks and settings (Bandura, 1977);
others-oriented and perceptual, were respectively renamed relational and perceptual.
These three dimensions constituted the Individual dimension of the IA model,
which focused on traits and competencies that had been shown in the literature to
positively influence heightened levels of success in interacting with people from other
cultures in overseas or cross-culturally significant settings. The Individual dimension
constituted one of four dimensions of direct determinants of expatriate adjustment (the
others were job, organizational, and nonwork).
A comprehensive meta-analysis of the IA model by Bhaskar-Shrinivas et al. (2005) of
over 50 determinants of expatriate adjustment using data from 8,474 expatriates in 66
studies emphasized the “centrality, criticality, and complexity of adjustment, strongly
supporting Black et al.’s (1991, pp. 257, 272) model.” They also concluded that the
“meta-analytic findings attest to the importance of some individual factors – overall
self-efficacy and relational skills – in predicting expatriate adjustment. The variance
explained by the latter exceeded that explained by other predictors by 30 percent”.
To summarize, empirical evidence suggests that the content domain of intercultural
competence can be usefully organized using three broad dimensions for individuals:
the cognitive/perceptual, other/relationship, and self/self-efficacy domains
(Bhaskar-Shrinivas et al., 2005; Mendenhall and Oddou, 1985; Black et al., 1991;
Thomas, 1998, p. 247). For clarity purposes, these three dimensions have been re-titled
the Perception Management, Relationship Management, and Self Management factors.
These three major intercultural competency factors will be reviewed below, along
with their dimensions; a brief discussion of the empirical support for each dimension is
included as well. It is important to note that based on the global leadership/expatriate
adjustment literatures, there are many competencies that can be classified within one
of the three aforementioned competency factors. Based on the reviews of the literature
we conducted we determined that seventeen intercultural competency dimensions
most prominently emerged in terms of:
.
consistency of appearance in empirical studies in the literature;
.
influence on interpersonal processes important to global leadership as reported
in the expatriate and global leadership literatures; and
.
generative impact, i.e. influence the impact, development or acquisition of
dynamic competencies.
There is a strong need in this nascent field for parsimony of content domain; that is, an
enormous list of competencies is unwieldy, and does not assist either social scientists
or practitioners to advance the field effectively. Our desire is that this three factor

framework of 17 intercultural competency dimensions can serve as a starting point for
scholars and practitioners working in this area to build from, with the anticipated
outcome of a future understanding of global leadership competencies that is more
nuanced, refined, and complex in nature. Currently, however, the vast number of
intercultural competencies that can serve as candidates for being important to global
leadership leave scholars in the field working haphazardly; for the field to progress in a
more refined understanding of its phenomenon, a parsimonious framework is needed.
Perception management
Perception management addresses how people cognitively approach cultural
differences. It assesses people’s mental flexibility when confronted with cultural
differences, their tendency to make rapid judgments about those differences, their
ability to manage their perceptions when confronted with situations that differ from
what they expect, and finally, it also assesses people’s innate interest in, and curiosity
about, other cultures. This factor comprised five facets.
Nonjudgmentalness refers to the extent to which one is inclined to withhold or
suspend judgment about persons or situations or behaviors that are new or unfamiliar.
In both the global leadership and expatriate literatures this facet relates to intercultural
effectiveness (Hudson and Inkson, 2006; McCall and Hollenbeck, 2002; Moro Bueno and
Tubbs, 2004).
Inquisitiveness reflects openness towards, and an active pursuit of understanding,
ideas, values, norms, situations, and behaviors that are new and different. It involves
the willingness to seek to understand the underlying reasons for cultural differences
and to avoid stereotyping people from other cultures. It also includes one’s capacity to
actively take advantage of opportunities for growth and learning. Tucker et al. (2004,
p. 230) conceptualize it as “the capability to accept new ideas and see more than one’s
own way of approaching and solving problems”.
This dimension also emerged in reviews of the global leadership literature (Bird and
Osland, 2004; Jokinen, 2005; Osland, 2008) and has also found support in work by
Kealey and his associates (Kealey, 1996; Kealey and Ruben, 1989) and others in the
expatriate literature (Arthur and Bennett, 1997; Black and Gregersen, 1991; Hudson
and Inkson, 2006; Mol et al., 2005). Black et al. (1999) found that inquisitiveness was the
most important factor within the constellation of competencies identified in their study.
Tolerance of ambiguity refers to the ability to manage uncertainty in new and
complex situations where there is not necessarily a “right” way to interpret things.
People may be open to new ideas and experiences, but not necessarily manage the
ambiguity and uncertainty associated with them.
Tolerance of ambiguity has commonly been found to be an important competency
contributing to intercultural effectiveness in both the global leadership (Jokinen, 2005;
Mendenhall and Osland, 2002a, b) and expatriate literatures (Arthur and Bennett, 1995,
1997; Cui and Awa, 1992; Hermann et al., 2008).
For example, Black et al.(1999) found that the ability to not only manage
uncertainty – but to embrace it and find it challenging and motivating, is an important
competency of global leaders. Ruben and Kealey (1979) found that tolerance for
ambiguity acts as an important contributor to the ability to communicate well with
people from other cultures, indicating that this competency combines with relationship
management competencies to enhance overall intercultural effectiveness.

Defining the
content domain

815

JMP
25,8

816

Cosmopolitanism refers to a natural interest in and curiosity about different
countries and cultures, as well as the degree of interest in world and international
events. To be effective in a global or cross-cultural milieu, it is necessary to have a
perspective of time and space that extends beyond one’s local setting (Kedia and
Mukherji, 1999; Flango and Brumbaugh, 1974; Goldberg, 1976). This is an important
orientation for global leaders to possess and emerged in reviews of the literature on
effective global leadership competencies (Bird and Osland, 2004; Mendenhall and
Osland, 2002; Osland et al., 2006).
Our conceptualization of cosmopolitanism reflects that of Levy et al. (2007, p. 240)
who argue that cosmopolitanism “represents a state of mind that is manifested as an
orientation toward the outside, the Other [. . .] a willingness to explore and learn from
alternative systems of meaning held by others”.
Category inclusiveness refers to the tendency to cognitively include and accept
things (including people) based on commonalities rather than dividing things into
groups or categories (even though noticeable categories for differentiating things or
people may exist. Detweiler (1975, 1978, 1980) identified category width as a construct
that captures the tendency of people to apply cognitive categories more loosely. He
found empirical support for the thesis that people with broader categories (i.e. people
who define categories to be more inclusive) will be similarly more inclusive when it
comes to people who are perceived to be culturally different. Category Inclusiveness
represents a refinement of the construct label by denoting how individuals use their
categorizing activities – to include rather than exclude.
Relationship management
Relationship management addresses people’s orientation toward the importance of
relationships in general; how aware they are of others and their interaction styles,
values, etc., and the level of awareness they have of themselves and their impact on
others. This factor complements the Perception Management factor in that it focuses
on how mental structures shape behaviors, especially with respect to the development
and management of intercultural, interpersonal relationships.
It should be noted that relationships also provide a source of information to help
people understand other cultures as well as serve as a source of social support. The
development of positive relationships is a critical aspect of effective intercultural job
performance (Harrison and Shaffer, 2005; Mol et al., 2005). Five dimensions comprised
this factor.
Relationship interest refers to the extent to which people exhibit interest in, and
awareness of, their social environment. People may be high in relationship interest, yet
nevertheless still lack the actual ability to develop effective relationships with those in
whom they are interested.
In the literature this intercultural competency is often bundled together
conceptually with other skills into broader conceptualizations of interpersonal skills;
for example, Shaffer et al. (2006, p. 113) conceptualize their people orientation variable
as encompassing “a desire to understand and relate to HCNs [what we term,
Relationship Interest] and to develop close relationships with them [what we term
Interpersonal Engagement]”. In their meta-analytic review of the expatriate
performance literature, Mol et al. (2005) found that the factor, interpersonal interest
emerged as a solid predictor of expatriate job performance.

This facet of the Relationship management factor has been noted in both the
expatriate literature (Arthur and Bennett, 1997; Kühlmann and Stahl, 1996; Sinangil and
Ones, 1997) and in the global leadership literature (Mendenhall and Osland, 2002a, b).
Interpersonal engagement refers to the degree to which people have a desire and
willingness to initiate and maintain relationships with people from other cultures.
Different terms have been used to denote this facet, including: people orientation
(Shaffer et al., 2006) interaction management (Ruben and Kealey, 1979), relationship
building (Kealey, 1996), outgoingness or extraversion (Arthur and Bennett, 1995;
Ronen, 1989), relational abilities ( Jordan and Cartwright, 1998; Thomas, 1998),
sociability and interest in other people (Kealey and Ruben, 1983; Stahl, 2001),
interpersonal skills (Hechanova et al., 2003) and intercultural competence (Dinges and
Baldwin, 1996). Global leadership literature reviews similarly note that this is an
important competency for effective intercultural interaction ( Jokinen, 2005;
Mendenhall and Osland, 2002).
Emotional sensitivity refers to the extent to which people have an awareness of, and
sensitivity to, the emotions and feelings of others. Emotional sensitivity is akin to the
Big Five personality factor of agreeableness, which refers to a prosocial and communal
orientation towards others without antagonism ( John and Srivastava, 1999; Shaffer
et al., 2006) and displaying courtesy and tact, empathy, kindness, and respect (Ones
and Viswesvaran, 1997; Shaffer et al., 2006). Mol et al. (2005) found in their
meta-analysis of the expatriate literature that Agreeableness is a predictor of
expatriate job performance. Similarly, Shaffer et al.(2006) found it to be a key predictor
of interaction adjustment.
Research in both the global leadership and expatriate literatures has found that
emotional sensitivity is critical to intercultural effectiveness as it contributes to an
individual’s ability to: show appropriate respect to others (Jordan and Cartwright,
1998; Moro Bueno and Tubbs, 2004), display both interpersonal and cultural empathy
(Cui and Van den Berg, 1991; Martin and Hammer, 1989), and show tolerance for
differences in others (Hudson and Inkson, 2006; Selmer, 2001).
Self-awareness refers to the degree to which people are aware of:
.
their strengths and weaknesses in interpersonal skills;
.
their own philosophies and values;
.
how past experiences have helped shape them into who they are as a person; and
.
the impact their values and behavior have on relationships with others.
High self-awareness provides a foundation for strategically acquiring new
competencies and skills, whereas low self-awareness promotes self-deception and
arrogance.
Jokinen (2005) categorizes this dimension as being one of the primary intercultural
competencies fundamental to effective global leadership. Similarly, Varner and Palmer
(2005, p. 1) argue from a theoretical standpoint that “conscious cultural self-knowledge
is a crucial variable in adapting to other cultures”. Goldsmith et al. (2003) include
self-awareness as an important competency in the personal mastery component of their
global leadership model. Wills and Barnham (1994) found that emotional
self-awareness was an important predictor of intercultural effectiveness, and Chen
(1987) found that it related to intercultural communication competence. Similarly, Bird

Defining the
content domain

817

JMP
25,8

818

and Osland (2004) concluded that one of the byproducts of the competency of
self-awareness, a sense of humility, is an important competency for successful
intercultural interaction.
Social flexibility refers to the extent to which individuals present themselves to others
in order to create favorable impressions and to facilitate relationship building. Kealey
(1996, p. 86) refers to this as “the ability to modify ideas and behavior, to compromise,
and to be receptive to new ways of doing things”. This is commonly manifested in both
the global leadership research literature (Mendenhall and Osland, 2002a, b) and the
expatriate research literature as being important to intercultural effectiveness
(Kühlmann and Stahl, 1996, 1998; Martin and Hammer, 1989; Ward, 1996).
Scholars have operationalized social flexibility in a variety of ways. One approach is
via the constructs of self-monitoring or impression management. Mendenhall and Wiley
(1994) hypothesized a relationship between impression management and expatriate
adjustment, and Montagliani (1996) found that it significantly correlated with cultural
adjustment scores, suggesting that individuals who use behavioral cues in the social
environments of new cultures will increase their potential to enhance their ability to adjust
and be effective in those new cultures. Similarly, in their metanalysis of the expatriate
literature, Hechanova et al. (2003) reported that Caligiuri (1995) found that self-monitoring
correlated with general expatriate adjustment and Harrison, Chadwick, and Scales (1996)
found it was associated with interactional adjustment on the part of expatriates.
Self-management
The self-management factor takes into account people’s strength of identity and their
ability to effectively manage their emotions and stress. To be successful in
intercultural situations, it is critical that people have a clear sense of themselves and a
clear understanding of their fundamental values. To be effective in a global context,
people must be able to understand, change and adapt appropriately to the foreign work
and intercultural environment, yet at the same time, they must also have a stable sense
of self in order to remain mentally and emotionally healthy. Seven competency scales
comprise this factor. Of the seven dimensions, three relate to sense of self and four
relate to managing emotions and stress.
Optimism refers to the extent to which people maintain a positive, buoyant outlook
toward other people, events, situations and outcomes. Optimism and its derivative
benefits are found both in the global leadership and expatriate literatures (Caligiuri,
2004; Gertsen, 1990; Kühlmann and Stahl, 1996; McCall and Hollenbeck, 2002).
Caligiuri (2004), in a study of 256 global leaders, found that they were significantly
higher in the realm of “conscientiousness” and significantly lower on the dimension of
“neuroticism” in terms of their Big Five personality scores than less effective global
leaders. Some of the lexical markers of Conscientiousness are being purposeful,
strong-willed, and determined (Ones and Viswesvaran, 1997), all manifestations of
optimism.
Self-confidence refers to the degree to which people have confidence in themselves
and have a tendency to take action to overcome obstacles and master challenges.
Although people may be optimistic regarding cross-cultural situations, they may
nevertheless lack the self-confidence to act positively on their optimism.
Self-confidence was noted by Kealey (1996, p. 84) in his review as being an
important competency “that is needed to be successful in another culture”. Similarly,

other scholars have found self-confidence or self-efficacy to be important variables in
intercultural effectiveness and adjustment (Arthur and Bennett, 1995, 1997;
Bhaskar-Shrinivas et al., 2005; Gertsen, 1990; Goldsmith et al., 2003; Harrison et al.,
2004; Hechanova et al., 2003; Jordan and Cartwright, 1998; Shaffer et al., 1999; Smith,
1966). In their meta-analyses of the expatriate adjustment literature, Bhaskar-Shrinivas
et al. (2005) and Hechanova et al. (2003) found that self-efficacy was a significant
predictor of expatriate adjustment.
Self-confidence relates to the Big Five personality dimension of extraversion, which,
among other things, reflects an energetic approach toward the social and material
world, sociability, and positive emotionality (John and Srivastava, 1999). Extraversion
has been shown to empirically predict expatriate performance (Mol et al., 2005)
Self-identity refers to the extent to which people maintain personal values
independent of situational factors and have a strong sense of personal identity. A
strong self-identity allows people to integrate their new cultural knowledge into
existing mental models, whereas those low in self-identity are either unable to integrate
new knowledge, or when they do, they experience life crises that overwhelm them.
Self-identity is akin to the construct of independent self-construal (Markus and
Kitayama, 1991, p. 226), which involves “construing oneself as an individual whose
behavior is organized and made meaningful primarily by reference to one’s own
internal repertoire of thoughts, feelings, and actions rather than by reference to
thoughts, feelings, and actions of others”. Research findings suggest that expatriates
with independent self-construals have higher levels of psychological adjustment
overseas than expatriates with interdependent self-construals (Oguri and Gudykunst,
2002; Pi-Ju Yang et al., 2006; Yamaguchi and Wiseman, 2001)
Emotional resilience refers to the extent to which a person has emotional strength
and resilience to cope with challenging cross-cultural situations. Emotional resilience
reflects the psychological hardiness that allows a global manager to carry on through
difficult challenges. Individuals who can manage and control their emotions are also
better equipped to deploy other global competencies than those who are low in
emotional resilience.
This dimension emerged in Mendenhall and Osland’s (2002a, b) review of the global
leadership literature, where they labeled it “hardiness”. It similarly emerged from the
ION review of global competencies (Bird and Osland, 2004). Emotional resilience is a
common indicator of intercultural effectiveness in the expatriate literature as well
(Arthur and Bennett, 1995, 1997; Caligiuri, 2000; Kealey, 1996).
Non-stress tendency refers to the scope of the dysfunctional stressors that may
influence people in their daily work and social life in intercultural situations. The
greater the tendency people have to experience stress, the more likely it is that they will
find it difficult to deploy their inercultural competencies in an effective way. Shaffer
et al. (2006, p. 112) label this emotional stability and define it as “the tendency to
experience positive emotional states and to respond calmly to stressful events”. Kealey
(1996, p. 86) refers to this competency as “the ability to be calm and steadfast despite
opposition, difficulties, or adversity [. . .] Learning to be patient is critical for success”.
Sometimes referred to as patience in the literature, it has been shown to be a critical
element of intercultural effectiveness (Gertsen, 1990; Kealey, 1994, 1996).
Responding to events naturally, with a calm, consistent bearing (Arthur and
Bennett, 1995, 1997; Mischel, 1965; Smith, 1966) or not being “easily worried [or]

Defining the
content domain

819

JMP
25,8

820

nervous” (Mol et al., 2005, p. 612) is an important competency in living and working in
cross-cultural settings. In their meta-analysis of 30 primary empirical studies in the
expatriate literature on predictors of expatriate job performance, Mol and associates
found that an orientation toward neuroticism was antithetical to performance in
cross-cultural settings.
Stress management refers to the degree to which individuals actively utilize stress
reduction techniques in their personal lives and are willing to use new techniques in the
future. People who consistently use stress reduction techniques are better able to
manage or enhance their emotional resilience and innate tendency to be unaffected by
typical stressors and gain energy to deploy other global competencies effectively.
Empirical evidence on the relationship of stress to expatriate adjustment provides
strong support for the importance of this facet (Coyle, 1988; Feldman and Tompson,
1993; Redmond and Bunyi, 1991; Searle and Ward, 1990).
Interest flexibility refers to the willingness to substitute important personal interests
from one’s own background and culture with similar, yet different interests in the host
culture. The ability to find new interests and activities to replace existing ones that do
not fit within the new culture is important in being successful in global or intercultural
settings (Brein and David, 1973; David, 1976; Mumford, 1975).
Recent research on this variable has supported the concept of interest flexibility as a
positive influence on expatriate adjustment. Zimmerman et al. (2003, p. 58) found that
German expatriates in the People’s Republic of China had higher levels of adjustment if
they were able to adjust their habits to fit what was available in the host culture.
Regarding leisure activities, they concluded that “the principal mode of adjusting to the
perceived lack of leisure possibilities was to change their habits [. . .] [such as changing]
their sports, such as giving up mountain-biking for playing squash”.
Discussion
Social scientists and practitioners working in the field of global leadership suffer from
the lack of a common agreement regarding the domain of intercultural competencies
that influence global leadership effectiveness. Working without such a framework
exacerbates tendencies toward atheoretical, survey-oriented, conceptual mapping
studies that often reproduce similar findings but couch them in new terminology. Such
efforts are not entirely unproductive, however enough of these studies now exist in the
field to warrant an integration of their findings into a working framework from which
more refined empirical and theoretical research should ensue.
The primary contribution of this paper is the delineation of the content domain of
intercultural competence as it applies to the phenomenon of global leadership. A
comprehensive review of the empirical literatures of global leadership and the closely
related area of expatriate adjustment suggests that three broad factors that constitute
intercultural competence in this particular context exist. The three factors that
emerged are consistent with both the theoretical (Mendenhall and Oddou, 1985; Black
et al., 1991) and empirical literatures (Bhaskar-Shrinivas et al., 2005; Hechanova et al.,
2003; Mendenhall et al., 2002; Shaffer et al., 1999) and at the same time extend the field
through the identification and categorization of dimensions for each faactor.
We propose that these three factors – perception management, relationship
management and self management – comprised 17 dimensions that have been shown
to consistently emerge from the extant empirical literature (five each for perception

management and relationship management and seven for self management). We
reiterate that whether more competencies should be added to these dimensions is an
empirical question for the field. The value of the framework provided in this paper is
not as a final categorization of intercultural competencies associated with global
leadership, but rather as a foundation upon which scholars can build a more
sophisticated, nuanced understanding of intercultural competencies associated with
global leadership and their interrelationships.
Caution is warranted regarding the proposed framework, as no published empirical
investigations have as yet examined the full set of dimensions embodied in this
presentation of the intercultural competence construct. A test of the comprehensive
framework, i.e. all three factors and 17 dimensions is called for, as well as the
validation of an instrument that measures them. In this vein, of particular interest
would be the examination of the internal consistency of the dimensions for each factor
as well as the a more rigorous understanding of the nomological net of intercultural
competence, including its antecedents and its impact on global leadership
effectiveness, especially as that influences key organizational outcomes.
A preliminary empirical investigation of the overall framework has yielded
promising findings that suggest the framework has rich potential. In a study of
Japanese expatriate managers, Furuya and associates (Furuya et al., 2009) found the
framework had predictive value with regard to several positive outcomes related to
global leadership. Specifically, they found that intercultural competency as defined and
measured using this framework positively influenced several global leadership-related
variables, including global business acumen (Black et al., 1999), interpersonal skills
(Bird and Osland, 2004) and systems management skills (Bird and Osland, 2004).
Because these variables fall under Leiba-O’Sullivan’s (1999) definition of dynamic
skills, these findings suggest that the three factors encompass intercultural
competencies that serve as “building blocks” in the development of other global
leadership capabilities. Moreover, the set of intercultural competencies was associated
with higher levels of competency transfer as well as higher levels of job performance.
The findings by Furuya and associates points to an important issue – how does this
set of intercultural competency factors with their attendant dimensions relate to the
larger set of global leadership competencies? One established model of global
leadership competencies is the global leadership pyramid (see Figure 1), developed by
Bird and Osland (2004) and subsequently refined by Osland (2008). The perception
management and self-management factors match up well with the threshold trait and
attitudes and orientations levels of the pyramid. Additionally, the relationship
management factor aligns with the interpersonal skills level of the pyramid. The 17
intercultural competency dimensions flesh out in detail the foundational layers of Bird
and Osland’s, 2004 model, allowing for more concrete hypothesis development and
subsequent empirical testing of the hypotheses. More specifically, it can be argued that
relationship interest, interpersonal engagement, emotional sensitivity, self-awareness
and social flexibility provide foundational competencies that allow for and support
mindful communication in intercultural contexts, contribute to the creation and
maintenance of trust relationships and facilitate the effective participation and
leadership of multicultural teams.
For practitioners, the lack of an integrative framework that provides direction
regarding intercultural competencies that are important for inclusion in global

Defining the
content domain

821

JMP
25,8

822

Figure 1.
Global leadership
competency pyramid

leadership development and assessment initiatives has been a hindrance to
organizations. This lack of guidance from social science forces practitioners to
continually wonder, “What competencies should we build our global leadership
programs upon?” Similarly, the intense need to develop and retain global talent
requires that global leadership competencies be measurable so that firms can assess
and develop those competencies within their human capital. Knowing that you can
develop global skills has the potential to enhance ambition and allow managers to see
themselves as growing in their skill set, thus producing loyalty and productivity
within a firm’s talent base (see Capelli, 2008). Indeed, the findings of Furuya et al. (2009)
appear to support Capelli’s thesis.
Without a foundational framework they are forced to traverse the entire field in
search of which competencies to include and which to exclude in their program
designing efforts. Or, conversely, often the idea of scouring through the research
literature proves daunting, and instead decision making regarding competency
inclusion in global leadership programs relies upon intuition, copying what other
companies have done, armchair theorizing, guesswork, or abandonment of the effort
altogether. The outcome is idiosyncratic leadership development programs that vary
widely in terms of competencies addressed both within industries and across
industries, and the lack of successful development of actual global leaders within firms.
The value-added of the proposed framework for organizations is that it can serve as a
ready template upon which practitioners can operate from in their global leadership

development design efforts. Operating in tandem with social scientists, assessment of
their development efforts would serve to refine the framework incrementally over time,
and allow for more focused training and assessment refinements to ensue within
organizational development programs.
References
Arthur, W. Jr. and Bennett, W. Jr. (1995), “The international assignee: the relative importance of
factors perceived to contribute to success”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 48, pp. 99-113.
Arthur, W. Jr. and Bennett, W. Jr. (1997), “A comparative test of alternative models of
international assignee job performance”, in Aycan, Z. (Ed.), New Approaches to Employee
Management. Expatriate Management: Theory and Research, Vol. 4, JAI Press, Greenwich,
CT, pp. 141-72.
Bandura, A. (1977), “Self-efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral change”, Psychological
Review, Vol. 84, pp. 191-215.
Bhaskar-Shrinivas, P., Harrison, D.A., Shaffer, M.A. and Luk, D.M. (2005), “Input-based and
time-based models of international adjustment: meta-analytic evidence and theoretical
extensions”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 48, pp. 259-81.
Bird, A. and Osland, J. (2004), “Global competencies: an introduction”, in Lane, H. (Ed.)
Maznevski, M., Mendenhall, M. and McNett, J. (Eds), Handbook of Global Management,
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 57-80.
Black, J.S. and Gregersen, H.B. (1991), “The other half of the picture. Antecedents of spouse
cross-cultural adjustment”, Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 22, pp. 461-77.
Black, J.S., Mendenhall, M. and Oddou, G. (1991), “Toward a comprehensive model of
international adjustment: an integration of multiple theoretical perspectives”, Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 291-317.
Black, J.S., Morrison, A. and Gregersen, H.B. (1999), Global Explorers: The Next Generation of
Leaders, Routledge, New York, NY.
Brein, M. and David, K.H. (1973), Improving Cross-cultural Training and Measurement of
Cross-Cultural Learning, Vol. 1, Center for Research and Education, Denver, CO.
Caligiuri, P.M. (1995), “Individual characteristics related to effective performance in
cross-cultural work settings (expatriate)”, unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
Caligiuri, P.M. (2000), “The big five personality characteristics as predictors of expatriate’s desire
to terminate the assignment and supervisor-rated performance”, Personnel Psychology,
Vol. 53, pp. 67-88.
Caligiuri, P.M. (2004), “Global leadership development through expatriate assignments and other
international experiences”, paper presented at the Academy of Management, New Orleans,
LA, August.
Capelli, P. (2008), “Talent management for the twenty first century”, Harvard Business Review,
March, pp. 74-81.
Chen, G. (1987), Dimensions of Intercultural Communication Competence, Publication No. AAT
8719577, PhD dissertation, Kent State University, Ohio.
Chen, G.M. and Starosta, W.J. (1996), “Intercultural communication competence: a synthesis”,
Communication Yearbook, Vol. 19, pp. 353-83.
Coyle, W. (1988), On the Move: Minimizing the Stress and Maximizing the Benefit of Relocation,
Hampden, Sydney.
Cui, G. and Awa, N.E. (1992), “Measuring intercultural effectiveness: an integrative approach”,
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 311-26.

Defining the
content domain

823

JMP
25,8

824

Cui, G. and Van den Berg, S. (1991), “Testing the construct validity of intercultural effectiveness”,
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 15, pp. 227-41.
David, K.H. (1976), “The use of social learning theory in preventing intercultural adjustment
problems”, in Pedersen, P., Lonner, W.J. and Draguns, J. (Eds), Counseling Across Cultures,
University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, HI, pp. 123-37.
Deardorff, D. (2004), “The identification and assessment of intercultural competence as a student
outcome of internationalization at institutions of higher education in the United States”,
PhD dissertation, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.
Detweiler, R.A. (1975), “On inferring the intentions of a person from another culture”, Journal of
Personality, Vol. 43, pp. 591-611.
Detweiler, R.A. (1978), “Culture, category width, and attributions: a model-building approach to
the reasons for cultural effect”, Journal of Cross-cultural Psychology, Vol. 9, pp. 259-84.
Detweiler, R.A. (1980), “Intercultural interaction and the categorization process: a conceptual
analysis and behavioral outcome”, International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 4,
pp. 275-93.
Dinges, N.G. and Baldwin, K.D. (1996), “Intercultural competence: a research perspective”,
in Landis, D. and Bhagat, R.S. (Eds), Handbook of Intercultural Training, 2nd ed.,
pp. 106-23.
Feldman, D.C. and Tompson, H.B. (1993), “Expatriation, repatriation, and domestic geographical
relocation: an empirical investigation of adjustment to new job assignments”, Journal of
International Business Studies, Vol. 24 No. 3, pp. 507-29.
Flango, V.E. and Brumbaugh, R.B. (1974), “The dimensionality of the cosmopolitan-local
construct”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 19, pp. 198-210.
Furuya, N., Stevens, M., Bird, A., Oddou, G. and Mendenhall, M. (2009), “Managing the learning
and transfer of global management competence: antecedents and outcomes of Japanese
repatriation effectiveness”, Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 40, pp. 200-15.
Gertsen, M.C. (1990), “Intercultural competence and expatriates”, International Journal of Human
Resource Management, Vol. 3, pp. 341-62.
Goldberg, A.I. (1976), “The relevance of cosmopolitan/local orientations to professional values
and behavior”, Sociology of Work and Occupation, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 331-56.
Goldsmith, M., Greenberg, C., Robertson, A. and Hu-Chan, M. (2003), Global Leadership: The Next
Generation, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Harrison, D.A. and Shaffer, M.A. (2005), “Mapping the criterion space for expatriate success:
task- and relationship-based performance, effort and adaptation”, International Journal of
Human Resource Management, Vol. 16 No. 8, pp. 1454-74.
Harrison, D.A., Shaffer, M.A. and Bhaskar-Shrinivas, P. (2004), “Going places: roads more and
less traveled in research on expatriate experiences”, Research in Personnel and Human
Resources Management, Vol. 23, pp. 199-247.
Harrison, J.K., Chadwick, M. and Scales, M. (1996), “The relationship between cross-cultural
adjustment and the personality variables of self-efficacy and self-monitoring”,
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 20, pp. 167-88.
Hechanova, R., Beehr, T.A. and Christiansen, N.D. (2003), “Antecedents and consequences of
employees adjustment to overseas assignment: a meta-analytic review”, Applied
Psychology: An International Review, Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 213-36.
Herman, J., Stevens, M. and Bird, A. (2008), “Tolerance for ambiguity: a refined measure for
international management research”, unpublished manuscript.
Hudson, S. and Inkson, K. (2006), “Overseas development workers: ‘Big Five’ personality scores”,
Journal of Pacific Rim Psychology, Vol. 1 No. 1, pp. 5-9.

John, O.P. and Srivastava, S. (1999), “The big-five trait taxonomy: history, measurement, and
theoretical perspective”, in Pervin, L. and Johns, O.P. (Eds), Handbook of Personality:
Theory and Research, 2nd ed., Guilford, New York, NY.
Jokinen, T. (2005), “Global leadership competencies: a review and discussion”, Journal of
European Industrial Training, Vol. 29 Nos 2/3, pp. 199-216.
Jordan, J. and Cartwright, S. (1998), “Selecting expatriate managers: key traits and
competencies”, Leadership & Organization Development Journal, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 89-96.
Kealey, D.J. (1994), Overseas Screening and Selection: A Survey of Current Practice and Future
Trends, CIDA, Hull.
Kealey, D.J. (1996), “The challenge of international personnel selection”, in Landis, D. and
Bhagat, R.S. (Eds), Handbook of Intercultural Training, 2nd ed., Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 81-105.
Kealey, D.J. and Ruben, B.D. (1983), “Cross-cultural personnel selection: criteria, issues and
methods”, in Landis, D. and Brislin, R.W. (Eds), Handbook of Intercultural Training, Vol. 1,
Pergamon Press, New York, NY, pp. 155-75.
Kedia, B. and Mukherji, A. (1999), “Global managers: developing a mindset for global
competitiveness”, Journal of World Business, Vol. 34 No. 3, pp. 230-47.
Kraimer, M.L., Wayne, S.J. and Jaworski, R.A. (2001), “Sources of support and expatriate
performance: the mediating role of expatriate adjustment”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 54
No. 1, pp. 71-99.
Kühlmann, T.M. and Stahl, G.K. (1996), “Fachkompetenz alien genügt nicht – Interkulturelle
Assessment Center unterstützen die gezielte Personalauswahl”, Personalführung Plus,
Vol. 96, pp. 22-4.
Kühlmann, T.M. and Stahl, G.K. (1998), “Diagnose interkultureller Kompetenz: Entwicklung und
Evaluierung eines Assessment Centers”, in Barmeyer, C. and Bolten, J. (Eds),
Interkulturelle personalorganisation, Verlag Wissenschaft & Praxis, Berlin, pp. 213-23.
Leiba-O’Sullivan, S. (1999), “The distinction between stable and dynamic cross-cultural
competencies: implications for expatriate trainability”, Journal of International Business
Studies, Vol. 30, pp. 709-25.
Levy, O., Beechler, S., Taylor, S. and Boyacigiller, N. (2007), “What do we talk about when we
talk about global mindset: Managerial cognition in multinational corporations”, Journal of
International Business Studies, Vol. 38, pp. 231-58.
McCall, M.W. Jr. and Hollenbeck, G.P. (2002), Developing Global Executives: The Lessons of
International Experience, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Markus, H. and Kitayama, S. (1991), “Culture and the self: implications for cognition, emotion,
and motivation”, Psychological Review, Vol. 98, pp. 224-53.
Martin, J.N. and Hammer, M.R. (1989), “Behavioral categories of intercultural communication
competence: everyday communicators’ perceptions”, International Journal of Intercultural
Relations, Vol. 13, pp. 303-32.
Mendenhall, M. (2001), “New perspectives on expatriate adjustment and its relationship to global
leadership development”, in Mendenhall, M., Kühlmann, T. and Stahl, G. (Eds), Developing
Global Business Leaders: Policies, Processes, and Innovations, Quorum Books, Westport,
CT, pp. 1-16.
Mendenhall, M. and Oddu, G. (1985), “The dimensions of expatriate acculturation: a review”,
Academy of Management Review, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 39-47.
Mendenhall, M. and Osland, J.S. (2002a), “An overview of the extant global leadership research”,
paper presented at the Academy of International Business, San Juan, June.

Defining the
content domain

825

JMP
25,8

826

Mendenhall, M. and Osland, J.S. (2002b), “Mapping the terrain of the global leadership
construct”, paper presented at the Academy of International Business, San Juan, June 29.
Mendenhall, M. and Wiley, C. (1994), “Strangers in a strange land: the relationship between
expatriate adjustment and impression management”, American Behavioral Scientist,
Vol. 37 No. 5, pp. 605-20.
Mendenhall, M., Kühlmann, T., Stahl, G. and Osland, J. (2002), “Employee development and
expatriate assignments: a review of the expatriate adjustment theory literature”,
in Gannon, M. and Newman, K. (Eds), Handbook of Cross-cultural Management, Blackwell
Publishers, Oxford, pp. 155-83.
Mischel, W. (1965), “Predicting the success of Peace Corp volunteers in Nigeria”, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 1 No. 5, pp. 517-20.
Mol, S.T., Born, M.P., Willemson, M.E. and Van der Molen, H. (2005), “Predicting expatriate job
performance for selection purposes: a quantitative review”, Journal of Cross-cultural
Psychology, Vol. 36 No. 5, pp. 590-620.
Montagliani, A.J. (1996), Impression Management and Cross-cultural Adaptation Measures,
dissertation, Publication No. AAT 0665820, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA.
Moro Bueno, C. and Tubbs, S. (2004), “Identifying global leadership competencies: an exploratory
study”, Journal of American Academy of Business, Vol. 5 Nos 1/2, pp. 80-7.
Mumford, S.J. (1975), “Overseas adjustment as measured by a mixed standard scale”, paper
presented at the meetings of the Western Psychological Association, Sacramento, CA.
Oddou, G. and Mendenhall, M. (1984), “Cross-cultural person perception: a review of
cross-cultural and related literature”, International Journal of Intercultural Relations,
Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 77-96.
Oguri, M. and Gudykunst, W.B. (2002), “The influence of self-construals and communication
styles on sojourners’ psychological and sociocultural adjustment”, International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, Vol. 26 No. 5, pp. 577-93.
Ones, D.S. and Viswesvaran, C. (1997), “Personality determinants in the prediction of aspects of
expatriate job success”, in Aycan, Z. (Ed.), New Approaches to Employee Management, JAI
Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 63-92.
Osland, J.S. (2008), “Overview of the global leadership literature”, in Mendenhall, M., Osland, J.S.,
Bird, A., Oddou, G. and Maznevski, M. (Eds), Global Leadership: Research, Practice and
Development, Routledge, London, pp. 34-63.
Osland, J.S., Taylor, S. and Mendenhall, M.E. (n.d.), “Global leadership: progress and challenges”,
in Bhagat, R.S. and Steers, R.M. (Eds), Handbook of Culture, Organizations, and Work,
Cambridge University Press, Oxford (in press).
Osland, J.S., Bird, A., Mendenhall, M.E. and Osland, A. (2006), “Developing global leadership
capabilities and global mindset: a review”, in Stahl, G.K. and Björkman, I. (Eds), Handbook
of Research in International Human Resource Management, Edward Elgar Publishing,
Cheltenham, pp. 197-222.
Pi-JuYang, R., Noels, K.A. and Saumure, K.D. (2006), “Multiple routes to cross-cultural adaptation
for international students: mapping the paths between self-construals, English language
confidence, and adjustment”, International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 30 No. 4,
pp. 487-506.
Redmond, M.V. and Bunyi, J.M. (1991), “The relationship of intercultural communication
competence with stress and the handling of stress as reported by international students”,
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 17, pp. 235-54.
Ronen, S. (1989), “Training the international assignee, in”, in Goldsten, I.L. (Ed.), Training and
Development in Organizations, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, pp. 417-53.

Ruben, B.D. (1989), “The study of cross-cultural competence: traditions and contemporary
issues”, International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 13, pp. 229-39.
Ruben, B.D. and Kealey, D.J. (1979), “Behavioral assessment of communication competency and
the prediction of cross-cultural adaptation”, International Journal of Intercultural
Relations, Vol. 3, pp. 15-47.
Searle, W. and Ward, C. (1990), “The prediction of psychological and socio-cultural adjustment
during cross-cultural transitions”, International Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 14,
pp. 449-64.
Selmer, J. (2001), “Psychological barriers to adjustment and how they affect coping strategies:
Western business expatriates in China”, International Journal of Human Resource
Management, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 151-65.
Shaffer, M.A., Harrison, D.A. and Gilley, K.M. (1999), “Dimensions, determinants, and differences
in the expatriate adjustment process”, Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 30,
pp. 557-81.
Shaffer, M.A., Harrison, D.A., Gregersen, H., Black, J.S. and Ferzandi, L.A. (2006), “You can take
it with you: individual differences and expatriate effectiveness”, Journal of Applied
Psychology, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 109-25.
Sinangil, H.K. and Ones, D.S. (1997), “Empirical investigations of the host country perspective in
expatriate management”, in Saunders, D.M. (Series Ed.) and Z. Aycan (Vol. Ed),
New Approaches to Employee Management: Vol. 4. Expatriate Management Theory and
Research, JAI, Greenwich, CT.
Smith, M.B. (1966), “Explorations in competence: a study of Peace Corps teachers in Ghana”,
American Psychologist, Vol. 21, pp. 555-66.
Stahl, G.K. (2001), “Using assessment centers as tools for global leadership development:
an exploratory study”, in Mendenhall, M.E., Kühlmann, T.M. and Stahl, G.K. (Eds),
Developing Global Business Leaders, Quorum Books, Westport, CT, pp. 197-210.
Thomas, D.C. (1998), “The expatriate experience: a critical review and synthesis”, Advances in
International Comparative Management, Vol. 12, pp. 237-73.
Thomas, D.C. and Lazarova, M.B. (2006), “Expatriate adjustment and performance: a critical
review”, in Stahl, G.K. and Björkman, I. (Eds), Handbook of Research in International
Human Resource Management, Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, pp. 247-64.
Tucker, M.F., Bonial, R. and Lahti, K. (2004), “The definition, measurement and prediction of
intercultural adjustment and job performance among corporate expatriates”, International
Journal of Intercultural Relations, Vol. 28 Nos 3/4, pp. 221-51.
Varner, I.I. and Palmer, T.M. (2005), “Role of cultural self-knowledge in successful expatriation”,
Singapore Management Review, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 1-25.
Ward, C. (1996), “Acculturation”, in Landis, D. and Bhagat, R.S. (Eds), Handbook of Intercultural
Training, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 124-47.
Wills, S. and Barham, K. (1994), “Being an international manager”, European Management
Journal, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 49-58.
Yamaguchi, Y. and Wiseman, R.L. (2001), “Locus of control, self construals, intercultural
effectiveness, and cross-cultural adjustment”, paper presented at the annual meeting of the
International Communication Association, Washington, DC.
Zimmerman, A., Holman, D. and Sparrow, P. (2003), “Unraveling adjustment mechanisms:
adjustment of German expatriates to intercultural interactions, work, and living
conditions in the People’s Republic of China”, International Journal of Cross Cultural
Management, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 45-66.

Defining the
content domain

827

JMP
25,8

828

Further reading
Lane, H.W., Maznevski, M.L. and Mendenhall, M.E. (2004), “Hercules meets Buddha”,
in Lane, H.W., Maznevski, M.,, Mendenhall, M.E. and McNett, J. (Eds), The Handbook of
Global Management: A Guide to Managing Complexity, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford,
pp. 3-25.
Lane, H.W., Maznevski, M., Mendenhall, M.E. and McNett, J. (2004), The Handbook of Global
Management: A Guide to Managing Complexity, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Shaffer, M.A., Ferzandi, L.A., Harrison, D.A., Gregersen, H. and Black, J.S. (2003), “You can take
it with you: individual differences and expatriate effectiveness”, BRC Papers on
Cross-cultural Management, No. 200308, Business Research Center, Hong Kong Baptist
University, Hong Kong.
About the authors
Allan Bird is the Darla and Frederick Brodsky Trustee Professor in Global Business at
Northeastern University. With more than 90 articles and book chapters, his work has appeared
in leading management and international business journals. He is the author/editor of five books,
including most recently Global Leadership: Research, Practice and Development (Routledge). His
research interests focus on effective management in intercultural contexts, with a particular
focus on intercultural sensemaking and global leadership development. Allan Bird is the
corresponding author and can be contacted at: abird@umsl.edu
Mark Mendenhall holds the J. Burton Frierson Chair of Excellence in Business Leadership in
the College of Business Administration at the University of Tennessee, Chattanooga. He has
coauthored numerous books, the most recent being Global Leadership: Research, Practice and
Development (Routledge), and has published numerous scholarly journal articles on global
leadership and international human resource management.
Michael J. Stevens is an Associate Professor of Management and a D. Smith Research Fellow
at the Goddard School of Business and Economics at Weber State University. His research
interests are in the general areas of improving organizational performance through teamwork,
empowerment and cross-cultural effectiveness. He is the lead author of the commercially
distributed Teamwork-KSA employment test and a member of the development team for the
Global Competencies Inventory. He is also an experienced corporate trainer and executive
development coach who has consulted with a wide variety of organizations, has held leadership
and board positions in industry, government, and not-for-profit enterprises.
Gary Oddou is a Professor at CSU San Marcos and former Director of the Global Business
Management program. He regularly teaches at Ecole de Management Lyon in Lyon, France, and
the National Economics University in Hanoi, Vietnam. He has also taught in Thailand, England,
Switzerland and former Yugoslavia. He earned his PhD in organizational psychology at Brigham
Young University. His research interests and publications are about international human
resource issues, including expatriation and repatriation adjustment and knowledge transfer;
global leadership and intercultural competencies. He is a partner in the Kozai Group
(kozaigrop.com), which specializes in identifying and developing people to work effectively with
foreigners.

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

