DOCUMENT RESUME
ED 384 608

AUTHOR
TITLE
PUB DATE
NOTE

PUB TY7E

EDRS PRICE
DESCRIPTORS

SP 036 110
Pajares, Frank
Self-Efficacy in Academic Settings.
Apr 95
39p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
American Educational Research Association (San
Francisco, CA, April 18-22, 1995).
Information Analyses (070)
Speeches/Conference
Papers (150)
MF01/PCO2 Plus Postage.
*Academic Achievement; Anxiety; Beliefs; *Educational
Research; Elementary Secondary Education; Higher
Education; Metacognition; Predictive Validity; Self
Concept; *Self Efficacy; Self Evaluation
(Individuals); Self Management; Self Motivation;
*Student Characteristics; *Student Motivation

ABSTRACT

This paper explored the contributions made by
self-efficacy theory to the study of self-regulation and motivation
in academic settings. Findings on the relationship between
self-efficacy and academic performance are first summarized. The
conceptual difference between the definition and use of perceptions
of competence in social cognitive theory and in other theoretical
perspectives of motivation is clarified. Next, results of recent
studies that investigated the role of self-efficacy and other
motivational constructs in various academic areas are reported.
Overall results demonstrated that, when self-efficacy is included in
statistical models with other, more global, self-beliefs (such as
self-concept, anxiety, and attributions), and with variables such as
academic background, gender, ethnicity, ability, and socioeconomic
status, self-efficacy is a strong predictor of academic performance
and mediates the influence of other determinants. (Contains 104
references.) (F8)

**********************************************************************
Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made
from the original document.
***********************************************************************

p
Self-efficacy

Running Head: SELF-EFFICACY

oco

SELF-EFFICACY IN ACADEMIC SETTINGS

a

Frank Pajares
Emory University

Paper presented at a symposium held during the meeting of the
American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, 1995.
Session 39A0

U S DEPAR.1MeNTOFEpl1CATION.,

PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE3 INFORMATION
CENTER (ERIC,
rh,s document has 1"),,en ,oc,roduced
rece,ved horn the pe, son Or n,cianliatior,
,,raynattrq rl

Maier changes have been mad, 1,
,mpove repo uchor orralr:,.
Ptarls of vie.v or ocarwrals stateo

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES
INFORMATION CENTER IERICI

:his

Jocurnent do not nee555:wly repfcr,,,t
uffr,rral OEFfI oostlorr

Please address correspondence to:
Frank Pajares
Educational Studies

4

Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322
Tel:
Fax:

404-727-1775
404-727-2799

Email: Mpajaregunix.cc.emory.cdu
BEST COPY AVAILABLE

44\

2

Self-efficacy

2

Self-Efficacy in Academic Settings
Abstract

The purpose of this paper was to identify the unique contribution made by self-efficacy

theory to the study of self-regulation and motivation in academie settings. Findings on the
relationship between self-efficacy and academic performances are first summarized. Second, the
conceptual difference between the definition and use of perceptions of competence in social

cognitive theory and in other theoretical perspectives of motivation is clarified. Last, results of
recent studies that investigate the role of self-efficacy and other motivational constructs in

various academic areas are reported. These results demonstrate that, when self-efficacy is
included in statistical models with other, more global, self beliefs (e.g., self-concept, anxiety,
perceived usefulness, attributions) and with variables such as academic background, gender,
race \ethnicity, ability, and socioeconomic status, self-efficacy is a strong predictor of academic

performance and mediates the influence of other determinants. These results support A.
Bandura s (1986) contention that particularized measures of self-referent thought surpass global
measures in the explanation and prediction of related outcomes.

Self-efficacy

3

Self-Efficacy in Academic Settings
In Social Foundations of Thought and Action, Albert Bandura (1986) wrote that
individuals possess a self system that enables them to exercise a measure of control over their

thoughts, feelings, and actions. This self system includes the abilities to symbolize, learn from
others, plan alternative strategies, regulate one's own behavior, and engage in self- reflection.
Human behavior results from the interplay between this self system and external-environmental

sources of influence. It is the capability for self-reflection, however, that is most uniquely
human, for this form of self-referent thought allows people to evaluate and alter their own
thinking and behavior. These self-evaluations include perceptions of self - efficacy -- personal

judgments of canability to accomplish specific tasks and deal with different realities.

Perceptions of efficacy influence human behavior in three ways. First, they influence
choice of behavior. People engage in tasks in which they feel competent and confident and avoid
those in which they do not. Second, they help de ermine how much effort people will expend on
an activity and how long they will persevere--the higher the sense of efficacy. the greater the

effort expenditure and persistence. Finally, self-efficacy beliefs influence individuals' thought
patterns and emotional reactions. People with low self-efficacy may believe that things are
tougher than they really are, a belief that fosters stress and a narrow vision of how best to solve a

problem. Hi' self-efficacy, on the other hand, creates feelings of serenity in approaching
difficult tasks.

Self-efficacy beliefs are important influences on motivation and behavior in part because

they mediate the relationship between knowledge and action. That is, environmental, cognitive.
and affective factors influence behavior partly by influencing self beliefs. As such. these beliefs
are strong predictors of individuals' subsequent performances. The tenets of self-efficacy theory.
as that specific area of social cognitive theory has come to he called, have been tested in varied
disciplines and settings and have received support from a growing body of findings from diverse
fields (see Bandura. in press: Lent & Hackett, 1987: Maddux & Stanley. 1986; Multon. Brown.
& Lent. 1991; Schunk. 1991).

Self-efficacy

4

In educational settings, self-efficacy has been prominent in studies that have explored its
relationship with attributions (Schunk, 1981, 1982a; Schunk & Cox, 1986; Schunk & Gunn,
1986), career development (see Lent & Hackett, 1987, for a review), goal setting (Bandura &

Schunk, 1981; Schunk, 1983a; Wood & Bandura, 1989), memory (Berry, 1987), modeling
(Schunk, 1981, 1987; Schunk & Hanson, 1985, 1988; Zimmerman & Ring le, 1981), problem
solving (Larson, Piersel, Imao, & Allen, 1990), reward contingencies (Schunk, 1983b), self-

regulation (Schunk, 1982b), social comparisons (Bandura & Jourden, 1991; Schunk, 1983a),
strategy training (Schunk & Cox, 1986), teaching and teacher education (Ashton & Webb, 1986),
anxiety and self-concept (Pajares & Miller, 1994a, 1994b), and academic performances across

subject areas (Bandura, 1993; Zimmerman & Bandura, 1994). In general, researchers have
established that self-efficacy beliefs are correlated with other self beliefs and with academic
changes and outcomes and that self-efficacy is a strong predictor of related academic outcomes.
The role that self beliefs play in motivating individuals is the primary focus of theoretical

perspectives other than social cognitive theory. These include theories about self-concept,
attributions of success and failure, expectancy-value, goals, and self-schemas. In the quest for
predictive supremacy and practical utility, self beliefs are also in competition with variables that
have been identified as influencing students' academic outcomes, such as anxiety, perceived
usefulness, previous experience and achievement, aptitude and ability, gender, race/ethnicity, and
socioeconomic status.

To better understand the role these self beliefs play in academic settings, researchers have
investigated the relationship between these beliefs and various academic outcomes as well as that

among the beliefs themselves. Although results have generally supported the contentions of
social cognitive theory as regards the rola of self-efficacy. they have not been as successful in
clarifying the nature of the relationship between self-efficacy beliefs and motivational constructs

from other theoretical perspectives. There are several reasons for this. Perhaps the major one is
that researchers from theoretical camps other than social cognitive theory have tended to define
judgments of capability in ways consistent with their own conceptualization of such self-

perceptions but not consistent with its definition and use by self-efficacy researchers. In most

Self-efficacy

5

cases, such definitions have been global and general and have lacked the specificity and
consistency with the criterial task that optimizes the predictive power of self-efficacy beliefs. As

a consequence, results tend to minimize the influence of self-efficacy and maximize the influence

of the determinants of interest to the theory in question. In studies utilizing causal modeling, the
theoretical frameworks used to hypothesize relationships have quite naturally been based on the
perspectives of the researchers, and so results add little to the understanding of self-efficacy's

presumed influence. As Gilligan (1982) observed, theory has the tendency to blind observation.
The purpose of this paper is to identify the unique contribution made by self-efficacy
theory to the study of self-regulation and motivation in academic settings and to compare its

influence on academic performances with that of other self beliefs prominent in theories of
motivation. 1'o these ends, findings on the relationship between self-efficacy and academic
performances are first briefly summarized. Second, the conceptual difference between the
definition and use of perceptions of competence in social cognitive theory and in other

theoretical perspectives of motivation is clarified. Last, recent findings that assess the role of
self-efficacy percepts and other motivational constructs in various academic areas are presented.
Self-efficacy and Academic Performance

Since publication of a seminal article introducing the construct of self-efficacy in 1977,
Bandura (1978, 1982, 1984, 1986, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1995, in press) has consistently maintained
that the judgments of capability an individual brings to a specific task are strong predictors of the
performance that results from that task and mediate the influence of other determinants of that

performance. Th, growing number of researchers who have subsequently investigated the role
of self-efficacy in academic settings generally support these contentions (e.g., Bores-Rangel,
Church, Szendre, & Reeves, 1990; Bouffard-Bouchard, 1989; Brown, Lent, & Larkin. 1989;
Felson, 1984; Lent, Brown, & Larkin, 1984, 1986; Locke, Frederick, Lee, & Bobko, 1984;
Maddux, Norton, & Stoltenberg, 1986; McCarthy, Meier, & Rinderer, 1985; Meier, McCarthy,
& Schmeck, 1984; Pajares & Johnson, 1994; Pajares & Kranzler. 1994; Pajares & Miller, 1994a.
1994b, 1995; Shell, Murphy. & Bruning, 1989; Vollmer. 1986; Wood & Locke. 1987; and see
Schunk and his colleagues; Lent & Hackett, 1987, for review of research on career self-efficacy).

Self-efficacy

6

Despite this abundance of riches, however, many studies are plagued by assessments of
self-efficacy that do not follow Bandura's (1986)' guidelines regarding specificity and

consistency with criterial tasks. Bandura cautioned that, because judgments of self-efficacy are
task- and domain-specific, global or inappropriately defined self-efficacy assessments will

weaken effects. When the efficacy beliefs assessed do not reflect with specificity the criteria'
task with which they are compared, their predictive value is diminished. For this reason,
measures of self-efficacy should be tailored to the criterial task being assessed and the domain of

functioning being analyzed. This caution has often gone unheeded in educational research,
where assessments of self-efficacy frequently bear little resemblance to the criterial task with
which they are compared but, instead, reflect generalized, or sometimes even unrelated, attitudes

about capabilities. The mismatch between self-efficacy and criterial task assessment is a
recurring theme. often producing confounded relationships and ambiguous findings.
Mu lton et al. (1991) found 36 studies written between 1977 and 1988 on the relationship

between self-efficacy and academic performance or persistence that met their criteria for
inclusion in a meta-analysis: containing a measure of self-efficacy and academic performance

and providing sufficient information to calculate effect size estimates. They computed that
efficacy beliefs were related to performance (r, = .38) and accounted for approximately 14% of
the variance in academic performance. However, effect sizes depended on specific
characteristics of the studies, notably on the types of efficacy and performance measures used.

The strongest effects were obtained by researchers who compared specific efficacy judgments
with basic skills measures of performance, developed highly concordant self-

efficacy/performance indices, and administered them at the same time. Significant relationships
are obtained even vith generalized self-efficacy indices, a phenomenon that Mutton et al.
described as reinforcing the theoretical and practical value of self-efficacy but that also tends to
produce confounded and misleading results. In fact, if global and generalized self-efficacy
assessments can predict performances that are not specifically related, the relationship between
properly assessed self-efficacy and performance should certainly increase.

Self-efficacy

7

Not all researchers have found a significant relationship between efficacy beliefs and
academic outcomes. Wilhite (1990) found that college students' self-assessment of memory
ability was the strongest predictor of academic achievement (GPA), followed by locus of control.

Self-efficacy showed a weak relationship. However, efficacy judgments were assessed using a
global self-concept measure. Smith, Arnkoff, and Wright (1990) tested the predictive power of
three theoretical models on academic performance--cognitive-attentional, cognitive-skills, and

social learning. Smith et al. concluded that, although variables within each model predicted
performance to some degree, self-efficacy was a weak predictor. Self-efficacy was
operationalized as study skills or test-taking ability and was measured with items Ilich as "Rate

how certain you are that you can study at a time and place where you won't get distracted." This
was compared with academic outcomes such as exam grades and course GPA. Again, when
efficacy beliefs do not reflect with specificity the criterial task, predictive power is minimized.
Some researchers have found that self-efficacy is related to self-regulated learning
variables (e.g., Feather, 1988; Fincham & Cain, 1986; Paris & Oka, 1986; Pokay & Blumenfeld;

1990; Schunk, 1982b, 1985). Findings in this area suggest that students who believe they are
capable of performing certain tasks use more cognitive and metacognitive strategics and persist

longer than those who do not (Pintrich & Garcia, 1991). For example, Pintrich and De Groot
(1990) reported a correlation between global academic self-efficacy and both cognitive strategy
use and self-regulation through use of metacognitive strategies. In addition, academic self-

efficacy correlated with academic outcomes such as semester and final year grades. in-class

seatwork and homework, exams and quizzes, and essays and reports. Perceived importance of
academic ac, ievement was associated with the outcome variables but was not a significant

predictor. Pintrich and De Groot concluded that self-efficacy played a mediational or
"facilitative" role in relation to cognitive engagement, that improving self-efficacy might lead to
increased use of cognitive strategies and, thereby, higher performance, and that "students need to
have both the 'will' and the 'skill' to be successful in classrooms" (p. 38).

A growing number of other findings support Bandura's (1986) contention that efficacy
beliefs mediate the effect of skill or other self-beliefs on subsequent performance by influencing

Self-efficacy

8

effort, persistence, and perseverance. For example, Collins (1982) identified children of low,
middle, and high mathematics ability who had, within each ability level, either high or low
mathematics self-efficacy. After instruction, the children were given new problems to solve and

an opportunity to rework those they missed. Collins reported that ability was related to
performance but that, t:gardless of ability level, children with high self-efficacy completed more
problems correctly and reworked more of the ones they missed.

Schunk (1981) used path analysis to show that modeling treatments increased persistence
and accuracy on division problems by raising children's self-efficacy, which had a direct effect

on skill. He later demonstrated that effort attributional feedback of prior performance
(e.g., "You've been working hard") raised the self-efficacy expectations of elementary school

children, and this increase was, in part, responsible for increased skill in performance of
subtraction problems (Schunk, 1982a). In subsequent experiments, he found that ability
feedback (e.g., "You're good at this") had an even stronger effect on self-efficacy and subsequent

performance (Schunk. 1983: Schunk & Gunn. 1986). Relich, Debus, and Walker (1986) also
reported that self-efficacy mediated the role of skill training and attributional feedback and had a
direct effect on the performance of division problems of learned helpless sixth graders.
Attribution showed a moderate direct effect on performance and a stronger indirect effect

mediated by self-efficacy. Schunk (1991) has provided an overview of research on the effect of
self-efficacy beliefs on academic motivation, specifically the role played by variables such as
perceived control, outcome expectations. perceived value of outcomes, attributions. and self-

concept. He concluded that all may provide a "type of cue" used by individual: to assess their
efficacy beliefs.
Self-efficacy and Other Motivational Theories

In some fashion. perceptions of capability play a prominent role in most theories of

motivation. For example. self-concept theorists point out that these percepts of self-worth
include judgments of confidence (see Rosenberg & Kapland. 1982: Shavelson & Bolus. 1982:

Shavelson, Hubner. & Stanton. 1976). Consequently. self-efficacy is considered an important
component of an individual's self-concept. Self-schema theory provides a concept of self with

Self-efficacy

9

four dimensions, one of which, the efficacy dimension, is characterized by individuals' beliefs

about their potentialities (Garcia & Pintrich, 1994). In attribution theory (Weiner, 1979), the
causal attributions that individuals make about the success or failure of their actions are

presumed to influence their subsequent performance expectancies. Recent findings suggest that
this relationship is reciprocal and that attributions influence motivation and performance largely

through the mediational role of self-efficacy (see Bandura, 1995; Schunk, 1991). And goal
theorists concur that self-perceptions of competence provide essential information used by
individuals when setting goals (Ames, 1992; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Nicholls, 1984, 1990).
Within the constructs that form the centerpiece of these theories, judgments of personal
capability perform the functions that Bandura (1986) suggests.
Subsuming beliefs of personal efficacy under broader and more generalized motivational
constructs may be useful for purposes of validating these constructs, but it can be problematic in
that it can obfuscate important differences between the self-beliefs and minimize the unique
contribution that self-efficacy perceptions make to an understanding of motivation and behavior.
To illustrate, it may be useful to explore in some depth the differing conceptions of the role of
self-efficacy perceptions in another theoretical perspective, that of expectancy-value theory.

According to this perspective, motivation is primaily a result of individuals' beliefs about the
likely outcomes of their actions and of the incentive value they place on those outcomes

(Atkinson, 1957; MaClelland, 1985). Individuals will be motivated to engage in tasks when they
value the outcome expected; they will be less predisposed to perform tasks whose outcomes they
do not value.

Expectancy-value theorists agree that judgments of competence play an interactive role

with valued outcomes in determining the tasks in which individuals will engage (Eccles 1983;
Wigfield & Eccles, 1992), but they emphasize the more prominent role of a construct similar to
that which Bandura (1986) called outcome expectations in influencing motivation and predicting

behavior. According to Bandura, judgments of personal competence differ from judgments of
the likely consequence that behavior will produce. Outcome expectations are related to efficacy
beliefs because these beliefs in part determine the expectations. Individuals who expect success

10

Self-efficacy

10

in a particular enterprise anticipate successful outcomes. Students confident in their math skills,
for example, expect high marks on related exams and expect the quality of their work to reap

benefits. The opposite is also true of those who lack such confidence. Students who doubt their
math ability envision a low grade before they begin a math exam. The expected results of these
imagined performances will be differently envisioned: academic success and other benefits for
the former, academic failure and curtailed possibilities for the latter.
Bandura (1984, 1986) argued that, because the outcomes people expect are largely
dependent on their judgments of what they can accomplish, outcome expectations are unlikely to
make much of an independent contribution to predictions of behavior when self-efficacy

perceptions are controlled. This is not to say that efficacy and outcome judgments are always
consistent. A high sense of efficacy may not result in behavior consistent with that belief if an
individual also believes that the outcome of engaging in that behavior will have undesired

effects. For example, some students may realize that strung math skills are essential for a good
score on the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) and eligibility for graduate school, which, in
turn, may ensure a prestigious career and affluent lifestyle, but low confidence in math abilities
may keep them away from certain courses and they may not bother to take the GRE or apply to

graduate school. High self-efficacy and negative outcome expectations are similarly possible.
The distinctions that Bandura (1978) drew between self-efficacy and outcome
expectations, as well as the roles he suggested they each play, are not without controversy.

Kirsch (1985) argued that Bandura used the term outcome expectations in two different ways. A
perceived ens ironmental contingency. Kirsch noted, is an outcome expectation beyond the

control of the individual. It is knowledge of logical and immutable consequences. such as
knowing that a good score on the GRE results in graduate school admission. These outcome
expectations are independent of individuals' perceptions of their own competence. This meaning.
Kirsch argued, is at odds with Bandura's claim that "the outcomes one expects derive largely
from judgments as to how well one can execute the requisite behavior" (p. 241), for, in this
sense, outcomes are dependent on performance and may well be at the mercy of efficacy beliefs.

11

Self-efficacy

11

Some re3earchers find the distinction between the two constructs ambiguous and suggest
that outcome expectations cannot so easily be extricated from efficacy beliefs (Eastman &
Marzillier,

1984;

Kazdin,

1978;

Manning & Wright,

1983;

Marzillier & Eastman,

1984;

Teasdale, 1978). They contend that self-efficacy judgments are dependent on and inextricably

int-rtwined with perceptions of the outcomes envisioned by actions. Therefore, outcome
expectations play a large role in creating efficacy perceptions. To illustrate that Bandura.
oversimplified the variab:cs involved in behavior change, Marzillier and Eastman (1984) used

the example of a socially anxious man who is asked to attend a party. To this poor soul, the
perceived outcomes are disastrous--people will notice he looks odd and laugh at him, and he will

make a fool of himself, be unable to talk to anyone, and drink too much. Marzillier and Eastman
argued that these expectations cannot be disassociated from efficacy judgments, that outcome
beliefs are as important in determining whether the man will attend the party as is his belief in

whether he can cope with the demands of the occasion. They argued that individuals infer their
efficacy beliefs from imagined outcomes. Consistent with the tenets of expectancy-value theory,
the) suggested that an individual's perception of the outcome and his value of the task necessary
to achieve that outcome will regulate his behavior as powerfully as his self-efficacy beliefs, and
independent of them.

Bandura (1984) countered that such cart-before-the-horse thinking fails to take into
consideration that "one cannot conjure up outcomes without giving thought to what one is doing

and how well one is doing it" (p. 232). The man confronted with the decision of whether to
attend the party envisions disastrous outcomes largely because he has little confidence in his

capabilities to meet the demands associated with parties. Foresightful action require, a causal
ordering wherein "human causai thinking places actions before the outcomes that flow from

them" (p. 237). It is unlikely that the partyphobic man, when faced with the decision of whether
to attend, envisions the disastrous outcomes and concludes that he is an inefficacious partygoer.

More likely, the perceived self-inefficacy creates the envisioned outcomes. It is also possible,
Bandura argued, to exclude considerations of outcome from judgments of personal efficacy. For
example, students are capable of assessing their academic capabilities quite apart from any

12

Self-efficacy

12

outcomes they may envision. Eastman and Marzillier (1984) remained dissatisfied and
unconvinced.

As earlier noted, researchers with theoretical persuasions other than those of social

cognitive theory define and use judgments of competence in ways consistent with their
theoretical understandings but not always with its definition and use by self-efficacy theorists.

Quite naturally, they also hypothesize relationships in statistical models from the perspective of
their own theoretical framework. As a consequence, the influence of self-perceptions of
competence is minimized and that of the competing belief optimized. In spite of these problems,
several studies from other theoretical perspectives offer strong support for the hypothesized role

of self-efficacy. One such investigation was conducted by Meece, Wigfield, and Eccles (1990),
who constructed two structural equation models from the perspective of expecta:icy-value theory
to investigate the relationship among mathematics ability perceptions, performance expectancies,
perceived importance, anxiety, and mathematics performance in a two-year longitudinal study of
junior high school students. Ability perceptions and performance expectancies were described

as "two types of efficacy beliefs" (p. 62). Some of the ability perception items, however, would
not be considered self-efficacy judgments by social cognitive theorists (e.g., "How have you been
doing in math this year?"), and the performance expectancies were global judgments of the type
that work to minimize effects (e.g., "How well do you expect to do in math this year?").
Importance of mathematics was analogous to perceived usefulness (e.g., "Being good at math is
important").

Model 1 tested the effects of perceived ability, expectancies, and importance on anxiety,

and Model 2 tested the effects of those four variables on students' grade point average (GPA). In
both cases, perceived ability was used as an exogenous variable hypothesized to be causally
predominant over the others. Perceived expectancies were hypothesized to have a reciprocal

relationship with importance in Model 1 and with importance and anxiety in Model 2. Because
Meecc et tl. (1990) conceptualized ability perceptions and performance expectancies as two

types of self-efficacy, they used ability perceptions from Year 1 to predict both anxiety and GPA
in Year 2 in an effort to avoid potential problems of multicollinearity.

Es

Despite tne global

Self-efficacy

13

assessment, correlations with grades were higher for the efficacy items than for the importance or
anxiety items, and path analysis results revealed that expectancies (global self-efficacy) had a
significant direct effect on grades whereas perceptions of importance did not.
The researchers found that expectancy (globally assessed self-efficacy) and perceived
importance were significantly related in both models and noted that Atkinson (1957) had argued
the relationship should be inverse--that individuals place greater value on tasks they believe they

can least accomplish. Recall that, according to social cognitive theory, the perceived importance
of a task is in large part the result of the outcome expectation an individual has for a particular
task and is related to self-efficacy judgments in much the same way as are outcome expectations.
Bandura (1986) argued that, because beliefs in part determine expectations, people generally
value those things they feel capable of accomplishing and do not place as much value on those

for which they have little confidence to perform. It is not unusual, then, that expectations and
perceived importance should be related, though the relationship can be complex.
Feather (1988) also used an expectancy-value orientation in a path analysis to study the
effect of math self-concept, perceived value of mathematics, and gender on the enrollment

decisions of university students. Like Meece et al. (1990), Feather defined mathematics selfconcept as a reflection of "expectancies of success in mathematics" (p. 381) that "could therefore
be classified as self-efficacy expectations" (p. 382) and assessed it with two global items, the first
asking students to report their previous mathematics grades (top 10%, well above average, etc.)
and the second with the item. "In general, how do you rate your ability to do well at
mathematics?" Like Meece et al.. Feather also found that perceived ability and importance were
correlated. Perceived ability also showed a stronger direct effect on choice of majors than did

perceived importance. Recall that what is noteworthy about these two studies is that, although
from a differing theoretical orientation, they demonstrate the predictive and mediational role of
self-efficacy, even when globally assessed.
Recent Investigations

A recent line of inquiry by Pajares and his colleagues has focused on the predictive and
mediational role of self-efficacy in academic settings. One important component of these studies

14

Self-efficacy

14

is the inclusion of other motivational constructs so as to help clarify the interplay among them.

In all cases, judgments of self-efficacy are measured in terms of particularized self-perceptions

of competence that are consistent with the criterial task being assessed. For example, if the
criterial task involves solving mathematics problems, the efficacy assessment asks students to
provide judgments of confidence to solve the individual problems (e.g., Pajares & Kranzler,
1994; Pajares & Miller, 1994a, 1994b, 1995); if the task involves writing an essay, students are
asked to provide judgments that they possess the various composition, grammar. usage, and
mechanical skills on which their writing performance is assessed (e.g., Pajares & Johnson, 1994,

1995; Valiante & Pajares, 1995). Results from these studies demonstrate that. when self-efficacy
judgments are included in path analyses or multiple regression models with other, more global,
self beliefs (e.g., self-concept. anxiety. perceived usefulness, perceptions of self-regulation,
attributions) and with variables such as ability and aptitude, academic background, race\ethnicity.
gender. and socioeconomic status, self-efficacy is a strong predictor of related academic

outcomes and mediates the influence of other determinants of academic performance. These
results support Bandura's (1986) contention that particularized measures of self-referent thought
surpass global measures in the explanation and prediction of related outcomes.
Math Self-efficacy, Self-concept. Perceived Usefulness, and Anxiety

Pajares and Miller (1994a) used path analytic techniques to discover whether
mathematics self-efficacy beliefs play the mediational role ascribed to them by social cognitive
theory and whether these beliefs are stronger predictors of solving mathematics problems than
are other determinants of performance such as self-concept. anxiety. perceived usefulness,
previous experience, and gender. The strong correlation between self-concept and anxiety
created a problem of multicollinearity. which creates instabilities in the parameter estimates that
lessen the effect of each variable. As a consequence. Pajares and Miller removed anxiety from
the path mock:. a choice guided by their primary interest in the interplay between self-efficacy
and self-concept (see Table 1). The independent variables accounted for 52% of the variability
in problem-solving performance. E(6.343)

61.80.p < 0001.

15

Self-efficacy

15

Pajares and Miller (1994a) found that math self-efficacy had stronger direct effects on
problem-solving performance (13 -= .545) than did the other determinants (see Figure 1). Math

self-concept and high school level each had modest effects. Results also revealed that the
relationships between performance and both self-concept and perceived usefulness were largely a

result of noncausal covariation due to the effect of self-efficacy. Self-efficacy influenced
performance almost exclusively directly and also mediated the effects of gender and prior
experience on self-concept, perceived usefulness, and problem-solving performance.
Writing Self-efficacy, Self-concept, and Apprehension

Pajares and Johnson (1995) also used path analysis to investigate the influence of writing
self-efficacy, writing self-concept. and writing apprehension on high school students' essaywriting performance. using a model that controlled for the effects of gender and previously

assessed writing aptitude. The researchers were especially interested in whether self-efficacy
beliefs would make an independent contribution to the prediction of writing performance given

the expected powerful effect of the aptitude assessment. Results showed that students' selfefficacy perceptions were strong predictors of their writing performance and played the

mediational role hypothesized by social cognitive theory. Self-efficacy had a direct effect on
writing apprehension and performance and partially mediated the effect of gender and writing
aptitude on apprehension and perfoi mance (see Figure 2). The independent variables accounted

for 53% of the variability in performance, F(4, 173) = 47.97, p < .0001. It should also be noted
that the use of previous performance and aptitude assessments as controls in studies of selfefficacy is itself problematic. as these are confounded with the influence of the self-efficacy and
other beliefs that earlier influenced these prior determinants (Bandura, in press: Dew. (ialassi, &
Galassi. 1984: Hackett & Betz. 1989). As a consequence. if the prior effect of self-efficacy is not
partialed out. the effect of self-efficacy in the model is lessened.

Pajares and Johnson (1995) reported that the magnitude of the correlations between all
independent variables and performance. as well as that between these variables and self-efficacy,

was generally consistent with those of previous investigations (see Table 2). One exception was
the strong relationship between %riting self-efficacy and performance (.60). which was higher

1 fi

Self-efficacy

16

than had previously been obtained. This was likely due to the rater' use of the self-efficacy
items as the criteria for scoring the essays.

As was the case in Pajares and Miller's (1994a) investigation of math self-efficacy, the
strong correlation between self-concept and apprehension resulted in multicollinearity. Due to
the prominence of writing apprehension in the writing research literature, the researchers

removed writing self-concept from the path model. Although students' writing apprehension and
performance were correlated, results showed that the influence of apprehension on performance

was largely a result of noncausal covariation with self-efficacy. This finding is consistent with
others that have been reported by researchers exploring writing or other academic areas (see
Alexander & Martray, 1989; Hackett & Betz, 1989; Meece et al., 1990; Pajares & Kranzler,
1994: Pajares & Miller, 1994a, on mathematics; Meier et al., 1984; Pajares & Johnson, 1994.

1995. on writing). A model in which apprehension was replaced with self-concept was tested
and revealed similar results. These findings were replicated by Valiante and Pajares (1995) with
a sample of fifth grade students.
Math Self-efficacy, Self - concept. Anxiety, and General Mental Ability

Pajares and Kranzler (1994) constructed a path model that included math self-efficacy.
general mental ability, math anxiety, previous background in mathematics, and gender. with

relationships hypothesized from prior findings and social cognitive theory (see Table 3). The
most substantive effort to extend previous findings involved the inclusion in the path model of a

measure of general mental ability, or psychometric g. Pajares and Kranzler chose an assessment
of psychometric g because it accounts for the single largest component underlying individual
differences in mental ability (see Carroll. 1993) and because of the general acknowledgement
that psychometric g is a strong predictor of academic performance (Hunter. 1986; Jensen, 1984.
1987: Thorndike, 1986).

Previous investigations of the influence of math self- efficacy on math outcomes had not

controlled for general mental ability. Instead, researchers used scores from the quantitative
section of standardized aptitude tests with samples of college students. This is problematic for
two reasons. First, as earlier explained, scores on apt;tude tests are confounded by other

17

Self-efficacy

17

attitudinal and anxiety factors related to mathematics. Second, college students' scores on
aptitude tests are restricted in range. Because students with lower scores are screened out by the
college admission's process, correlations between math performance and aptitude measures in

college samples are attenuated. Pajares and Miller (1994a) did not include an ability measure in
their path model but acknowledged that its exclusion may have influenced the effects found and

recommended that a future model include such a measure with an eye to testing their findings. A
nonverbal, untimed measure of general mental abilities such as Raven's Advanced Progressive
Matrices is less influenced by educational background than are aptitude tests or other ability

measures. Thus, it minimizes the confounding and provides a better control for ability in a path
model testing the mediational role of self-efficacy.
The key finding from this study was that the direct effect of self-efficacy on performance
was as strong (p = .348) as was the effect of ability (13 = .321)(see Figure 3). The direct effect of
anxiety on performarice (0 = -.113) and that of self-efficacy on anxiety (13 = -.411) support

previous findings that the influence of anxiety on academic outcomes is minimized when selfefficacy is included in a model and that anxiety is to a great extent a by-product of efficacy

perceptions. These are striking results in light of the particularly stringent test of the influence of
self-efficacy that inclusion of a general mental ability measure in the path model provides in an
investigation of this type (see Thorndike, 1986; Zimmermann, Bandura, & Martinez-Pons,
1992). In addition, self-efficacy partially mediated the effect of ability and math background

both on anxiety and performance. The independent variables accounted for 61% of the
variability in problem-solving performance. F(5.323) = 99.1,p < .0001.
Anxiety correlated significantly with problem-solving performance. but results indicated;

that the influence of anxiety was primarily a result of noncausal covariation due to the effect of
self-efficacy. Similar findings have been reported by researchers exploring mathematics and
other academic areas (see Alexander & Martray, 1989: Hackett. 1985: Hackett & Betz, 1989:
Pajares & Johnson. 1994, 1995: Pajares & Miller. 1994a). It should be noted that Pajares and

Kranzler (1994) also assessed math self-concept but dropped it from the analysis after finding
multicollinearity with math anxiety. A path analysis model in which anxiety was replaced with

18

Self-efficacy

18

self-concept revealed similar effects in similar proportions. These findings were supported by
preliminary results from two studies investigating the physical science and biology self-efficacy
of middle school students (Pajares & Brown, 1995).
Increasing the Predictive Power of Self-efficacy
As earlier noted, even self-efficacy researchers have often used generalized, global, or

multiple-scale self-efficacy measures to predict academic outcomes. In studies of math selfefficacy, for example. researchers have generally operationalized the construct in terms of
individuals' judgments of their capabilities to solve math problems, perform math-related tasks,
and succeed in math-related courses--the three subscales of the Mathematics Self-Efficacy Scale
created by Betz and Hackett (1983)(see, for example. Hackett & Betz. 1989: Randhawa, Beamer,
& Lundberg, 1993).

In line with Bandura's (1986) guidelines regarding specificity and consistency of selfefficacy and performance assessment, Pajares and Miller (1995) observed that these judgments of

math capabilities are substantively different. Although they have in common that all are mathrelated judgments. their predictive value should largely depend on the nature of the criterial tasks

with which they are compared. Consequently. students' judgments to solve math problems
should be more strongly predictive of their ability to solve those problems than should their

confidence to perform other math-related tasks or succeed in math-related courses. Similarly,
their judgments to succeed in math-related courses should be more strongly predictive of their
choice to enroll in such courses than should their confidence to solve specific problems or

perform mathematics tasks. Figure 4 represents the typical method of using multiple-scale math
self-efficacy assessments with dependent measures such as solving math problems or choosing
math-related majors. The more parsimonious model in Figure 5 more accurately reflects the role
of the same serf- efficacy assessments in predicting those outcomes.

Pajares and Miller (1995) compared these judgments of capability with two outcome
measures: ability to solve the problems on which self-efficacy was assessed am; math-relatedness

of academic majors. Results confirmed that Bandura's (1986) warnings regardinf, specificity of
self-efficacy and performance assessment are well founded. Students' confidence to solve

Self-efficacy

19

mathematics problems was a more powerful predictor of their ability to solve those problems
than was their confidence to perform math-related tasks or their confidence to earn A's or B's in

math-related courses. Similarly, their confidence to succeed in such courses was more predictive
of their choice of majors that required them to take many of the math-related courses on which

they expressed that confidence. Although there are different ways of assessing self-efficacy, the
more theoretically appropriate and empirically warranted are those in which the self-efficacy
measure assesses the same or similar skills required for the performance task.

Recall that researchers have found that even genaalized or less closely related indices
will correlate significantly with academic outcomes (see Multon et al., 1991). Pajares and Miller
(1995) found this phenomenon as well. That is, each subscale, as well as the full-scale,
correlated significantly with each outcome. Prediction was enhanced, however, as self-efficacy
and performance correspondence more closely matched
Math Self-efficacy, Self-concept, Anxiety, and Attributions

Pajares and Dixon (1995) are currently completing a study whose primary focus is to
examine the interplay between self-efficacy judgments, motivational variables, and mathematical
problem-solving with special education, regular. and gifted middle school students mainstreamed
in Algebra classes and special education students who are self-contained as a result of more

serious disabilities. The motivational variables include self-concept, anxiety, attributions of
success and failure, and self-efficacy for self-regulated learning. In addition, cognitive ability,

gender, previous mathematics attainments, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic status are
controlled.

Preliminary results suggest that self-efficacy was predictive of mathematical problemsolving capabilities of all students with the exception of the self-contained special education

students. Consistent with previous results, most students were generally overconfident about
their math abilities, but self-contained students were significantly more overconfident. In
addition, these results point out that the self-contained special education students' self-efficacy
perceptions were so out of line N ith their actual competence that they had little awareness of

Self-efficacy

20

what they knew and did not know. This poor calibration makes learning very difficult given that
a major factor in learning is the ability to self-correct (Pressley, Borkowsky, & Schneider, 1987).
As expected, gifted students had higher performance, self-efficacy, self-concept, and
lower anxiety scores and were better calibrated in their judgments of capabilities than either

regular or special education students. These results of higher calibration for gifted students
support research findings showing that students with higher general mental ability had higher
calibration and performance (Pajares & Kranz ler, 1994).

Multiple regression results revealed that ',-.ath self-efficacy was the strongest predictor of

performance in a model that controlled for self-corcept, anxiety, self-efficacy for self-regulated
learning, cognitive ability, semester grades, socioeconomic status, and gender. Path analyses are
in the process of being conducted. As regards the relationship between self-efficacy perceptions
and attributions of success and failure, preliminary results reveal that high self-efficacy students
tended to attribute their success to ability, intelligence, and their usual effort, whereas low self-

efficacy students attributed their success to luck and to the fact that problems are easy. As
Bandura (1986, 1995) has theorized, high self-efficacy students tended to attribute their failure to
not putting forth their usual effort, whereas low self-efficacy students attributed their failure to

ability, luck, general intelligence. and difficult problems. More detailed analyses focusing on
each of the student subgroups should provide additional insights.
Conclusions

Beyond supporting the hypothesized predictive and mediational role of self-efficacy,
results from the investigations of Pajares and his associates show that, as Bandura (1986)
theorized. particularized judgments of capability are better predictors of highly related academic

performances than more generalized self-referent judgments. That is to say that specific
judgments are better predictors of the specific performances on which the judgments are based

than are broader, less contextual, less task-specific judgments. How could it be otherwise? This
begs a question of practical utility, given that many criterial tasks of interest in the motivational
and academic arenas cannot be assessed with the specificity afforded by. say. the solution of
mathematics problems.

Self-efficacy

21

Although researchers have demonstrated that self-efficacy beliefs are also good predictors
of more generalized outcomes such as grades (Bandura, 1993; Meece et al., 1990; Pintrich &
Garcia, 1991), choice of academic majors (Hackett & Betz, 1989), and intention to enroll in
math-related courses (Lent, Lopez, & Bieschke, 1993), Lent and Hackett (1987) observed that
the optimal level of specificity of an efficacy assessment must ultimately depend on the

complexity of the performance criteria with which it is compared. Academic outcomes,
particularly in investigations of career choices and decisions, are seldom specific in nature, and
Lent and Hackett warned that specificity and precision are often purchased at the expense of

external validity and practical relevance. And general self-perceptions are useful in their own
right - -they can provide teachers and counselors with information regarding students' dispositions,

and results may be useful in helping to predict outcomes that do not easily lend themselves to

microanalytic analysis. Some reser _hers have also noted the need to explore the generality of
self-efficacy beliefs--that is. the extent to which they relate to, or transfer across, different
performance tasks or domains (Lent & Hackett, 1987; Mu lton et al., 1991). Findings from this
line of inquiry should help further the generalizability and practical relevance and utility of selfefficacy theory.

Bandura (1984, 1986. in press) noted that knowledge, competence. and various forms of
self-kne Ai ledge and self-belief act in concert to provide adequate explanations of behavior. Such

explanations cannot be had without considering the role that each may play in human decision-

making and functioning in a given context. This rich and often complex interplay may create
situations in which self-efficacy is neither the most important influence on nor especially
predictive of behavior (Schunk, 1991). Moreover, human functioning is such that discordances
between beliefs and between belief and action are possible. For example, some students may be
highly confident of their academic ability, but, if the outcomes they expect are dismal (a poor job
market. strong competition for few jobs), it is doubtful they will behave in concert with their
beliefs. Conversely, low self-efficacy may he overcome by valued outcomes and potential
rewards. And of course. if i,.dividuals lack necessary skills, no amount of self-efficacy will bring

Self-efficacy

22

about the desired performance, although increased effort, persistence, and perseverance may lay
the foundation for skill improvement and better subsequent performance.

Nonetheless, Bandura (1984) hypothesized that, because individuals' beliefs of personal
competence "touch, at least to some extent, most everything they do" (p. 251) ane because selfefficacy mediates the effect of other determinants of behavior, when these determinants are

controlled, self-efficacy judgments should prove better predictors of choice and direction of
behavior. Because human behavior is multiply determined, however, its understanding and
explanation require an appreciation of the interplay among the determinants that act as common

mechanisms of personal agency. Commonality of mechanism, Bandura cautioned, should not be
confused with exclusivity of mechanism. Hence one need not fear that perceived self efficacy
will "usurp the lion's share of the variance in human conduct" (p. 252).
It seems clear that, to develop more complete understandings of the sources of this
variance, researchers with differing theoretical allegiances should engage in greater
intertheoretical crosstalk and investigative collaboration using research designs that incorporate

the various constructs operationalized and used in a manner consistent with the construct's
theoretical home. For example, researchers incorporating self-perceptions of capability into
studies of self-concept might ensure that self-efficacy is assessed at a level of specificity

consistent with the out )me variables under investigation. For their part, self-efficacy
researchers would take the same methodological precautions when assessing and using other

motivational constructs. In studies requiring the use of self-report instruments, researchers might
more accurately assess a construct by using appropriate instruments created by researchers from

the construct's theoretical home than by creating their own. Such efforts would be instrumental
in identifying the contexts in which certain motivational constructs may be better predictors of
human functioning as well as the unique role that each construct plays in the general

development of self-regulatory skills. The result would be a clearer and deeper understanding of
the nature of the interplay between self-efficacy and its motivational cousins.

Self-efficacy

23

References

Ames, C. (1992). Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student motivation. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 84, 261-271.
Ashton, P. T., & Webb, R. B. (1986). Making a difference: Teachers' sense of efficacy
and student achievement. New York: Longman.
Alexander, L., & Martray, C. (1989). The development of an abbreviated version of the

Mathematics Anxiety Rating Scale. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and
Development, 22, 143-150.

Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of risk-taking behavior. Psychological
Review, 64, 359-372.

Bandura. A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84. 191-215.
Bandura, A. (1978). Reflections on self-efficacy. Advances in Behavioural Research and
Therapy. 1. 237-269.

Bandura. A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist,
37. 122-147.

Bandura, A. (1984). Recycling misconceptions of perceived self-efficacy. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 8, 231-255.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1989). Human agency in social cognitive theory. American Psychologist,
44. 1175-1184.

Bandura, A. (1991). Social cognitive theory of self-regulation. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 50. 248-287.
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning.
Educational Psychologist. 28. 117-148.
Bandura. A. (1995). Self-efficacy. In V. S. Ramachaudran (Ed.). Encyclopedia of Human
Behavior (vol. 4. 71-81). New York: Academic Press.

24

Self-efficacy

24

Bandura, A. (in press). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.

Bandura. A., & Jourden, F. J. (1991). Self-regulatory mechanisms governing the
motivational effects of goal systems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 941-951.
Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. H. (1981). Cultivating competence, self - efficacy, and intrinsic

interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41,
586-598.

Berry, J. M. (1987, September). A self- efficacy model of memory performance. Paper

presented at the meeting of the American Psychological Association, New York.
Betz, N. E., & Hackett. G. (1983). The relationship of mathematics self-efficacy
expectations to the selection of science-based college majors. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
23, 329-345.

Bores-Rangel, E.. Church, A. T.. Szendre, D., & Reeves. C. (1990). Self-efficacy in
relation to occupational consideration and academic performance in high school equivalency
students. Journal of Counseling Psychologv, 37, 407-418.
Bouffard-Bouchard, T. (1989). Influence of self-efficacy on performance in a cognitive
task. Journal of Social Psychology, 130, 353-363.
Brown, S. D.. Lent. R. D.. & Larkin, K. C. (1989). Self-efficacy as a moderator of
scholastic aptitude-academic performance relationships. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 35,
64-75.

Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey offactor- analytic studies. New
York. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Collins. J. L. (1982. March). Self-efficacy and ability in achievement behavior. Paper
presented at the meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York.

Dew. K. M. H.. Galassi, J. P.. & Galassi, M. D. (1984). Math anxiety: Relations with
situational test anxiety. performance. physiological arousal, and math avoidance behavior.

Journal olCotinseling P.sychologt. 31, 580-583.
Dweck, C. S.. & Leggett. E. 1. (l 9F8). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and
personality. P.sychological Review, 95, 256-272.

Self-efficacy

25

Eastman, C., & Marzillier, J. S. (1984). Theoretical and methodological difficulties in
Bandura's self-efficacy theory. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 8, 213-229.
Eccles, J. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.),

Achievement and achievement motives: Psychological ana sociological approaches (pp. 75-146).
San Francisco: Freeman.

Feather, N. T. (1988). Values, valences, and course enrollment: Testing the role of
personal values within an expectancy-valence framework. Journal of Educational Psychology,

80,381-391.
Felson. R. B. (1984). The effect of self-appraisals of ability on academic performance.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 944-952.
Fincham, F., & Cain, K. (1986). Learned helplessness in humans: A developmental
analysis. Developmental Review. 6. 138-156.

Garcia. T., & Pintrich, P. R. (1994). Regulating motivation and cognition in the
classroom: The role of self-schemas and self-regulatory strategies. In

Schunk and B.

Zimmerman (Eds.), Seif-regulation of learning and performance: Issues and educational
applications. Hillsdale. NJ: Erlbaum.
Gilligan. C. (1982). In a different voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hackett. G. (1985). The role of mathematics self-efficacy in the choice of math-related
majors of college women and men: A path analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 31,
47-56.

Hackett. G., & Betz. N. E. ( I 989). An exploration of the mathematics self-

efficacy/mathematics performance correspondence. Journal for Research in Mathematics
Education. 20, 261-273.

Hunter. J. E. (1986). Cognitive ability, cognitive aptitudes. job knowledge. and job
performance. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 29, 340-362.

Jensen. A. R. (1984). lest validity: g versus the specificity doctrine. Journal of Social
and Biological Structures. 29. 93-118.

Self - efficacy

26

Jensen, A. R. (1987). The g beyond factor analysis. In J. C. Conoley, J. A. Glover, & R.
R. Ronning (Eds.), The influence of cognitive psychology on testing and measurement. Hillsdale,

NJ: Erlbaum.
Kazdin, A. E. (1978). Conceptual and assessment issues raised by self-efficacy theory.

Advances in Behavioural Research and Therapy, 1, 177-185.

Kirsch, I. (1985). Self-efficacy and expectancy: Old wine with new labels. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 824-830.
Larson, L. M., Piersel, W. C., Imao, A. K., & Allen, S. J. (1990). Significant predictors of
problem-solving appraisal. Journal of counseling Psycho&

,

37, 482-490.

Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Larkin, K. C. (1984). Relation of self-efficacy expectations
to academic achievement and persistence. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 31, 356-362.

Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Larkin, K. C. (1986). Self-efficacy in the prediction of
academic performance and perceived career options. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 33,
265-269.

Lent, R. W., & Hackett, G. (1987). Career self-efficacy: Empirical status and future

directions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 30, 347-382.
Lent, R. W., Lopez, F. G., & Bieschke, K. J. (1993). Predicting mathematics-related

choice and success behaviors: Test of an expanded social cognitive model. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 42, 223-236.

Locke, E. A., Frederick, E., Lee, C., & Bobko, P. (1984). Effect of self-efficacy, goals,
and task strategies on task performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69, 241-251.
Maddux, J. E., Norton, L. W., & Stoltenberg, C. D. (1986). Self-efficacy expectancy,
outcome; expectancy, and outcome value: Relative effects on behavioral intentions. Journal of'
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 783-789.
Maddux, J. E., & Stanley, M. A. (Eds.). (1986). Self-efficacy theory in contemporary

psychology [Special issue]. Journal of Social and Clinical Psycholok), 4(3).
Manning, M. M., & Wright, T. L. (1983). Self-efficacy expectancies, outcome

expectancies, and the persistence of pain control in childbirth. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 45, 421-431.

27

Self-efficacy

27

Marzillier, J. S., & Eastman, C. (1984). Continuing problems with self-efficacy theory: A
reply to Bandura. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 8, 257-262.
McCarthy, P., Meier, S., & Rinderer, R. (1985). Self-efficacy and writing. College
Composition and Communication, 36, 465-471.
McClelland, D. C. (1985). How motives, skills, and values determine what people do.
American Psychologist, 40, 812-825.
Meece, J. L., Wigfield, A., & Eccles, J. S. (1990). Predictors of math anxiety and its

influence on young adolescents' course enrollment and performance in mathematics. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 82, 60-70.
Meier, S., McCarthy, P. R.. & Schmeck, R. R. (1984). Validity of self-efficacy as a
predictor of writing performance. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 8, 107-120.
Multon, K. D., Brown, S. D., & Lent, R. W. (1991). Relation of self-efficacy beliefs to
academic outcomes: A meta-analytic investigation. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 38,
30-38.

Nicholls, J. (1984). Achievement motivation: Conceptions of ability, subjective
experience, task choice, and performance. Psychological Review, 91, 328-346.

Nicholls, J. G. (1990). What is ability and why are we mindful of it? A developmental

perspective. In R. Sternberg & J. Kolligian (Eds.). Competence considered. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Pajares, F., & Brown. W. (1995). Self-efficacy beliefs in middle school science.
Unpublished raw data.

Pajares, F., & Dixon. D. (1995). Mathematics self-efficacy and performance attainments

of mainstreamed regular, special education, and gifted students. Manuscript in preparation
Pajares, F., & Johnson, M. J. (1994). Confidence and competence in writing: The role of
self-efficacy, outcome expectancy. and apprehension. Research in the Teaching of English, 28,
316-334.

Pajares, F., & Johnson, M. J. (1995, April). Role of self-efficacy beliefs in the writing of

high school students: A path analysis. Paper to be presented at the meeting of the American
Educational Research Association. San Francisco.

28

Self-efficacy

28

Pajares, F., & Kranz ler, J. (1994). Competence and confidence in mathematics: The role

of self-efficacy, self-concept, and general mental ability in mathematical problem-solving.

Florida Educational Research Council Research Bulletin, 26(1/2). Sanibel, FL: Florida
Educational Research Council.

Pajares, F., & Miller, M. D. (1994a). The role of self-efficacy and self-concept beliefs in

mathematical problem-solving: A path analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86,
193-203.

Pajares, F., & Miller, M. D. (1994b). Mathematics self-efficacy and mathematical

problem-solving: Implications of using varying forms of assessment. Florida Educational
Research Council Research Bulletin, 26(1/2). Sanibel, FL: Florida Educational Research
Council.

Pajares, F., & Miller, M. D. (1995). Mathematics self-efficacy and mathematics
outcomes: The need for specificity of assessment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 42(2).
Paris, S. G., & Oka, E. (1986). Children's reading strategies, metacognition and
motivation. Developmental Review, 6, 25-36.

Pintrich, P. R., & De Groot, E. V. (1990). Motivational and self-regulated learning
components of classroom academic performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82. 33-40.
Pintrich, P. R., & Garcia. T. (1991). Student goal orientation and self-regulation in the
college classroom. In M. Maehr & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Advances in motivation and

achievement: Goals and self-regulatory processes (Vol. 7, p. 371-402). Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.

Pintrich, P. R., Marx. R. W.. & Boyle, R. A. (1993). Beyond cold conceptual change: The
role of motivational beliefs and classroom contextual factors in the process of conceptual change.
Review of Educational Research, 63, 167-199.

Pokay, P., & Blumenfeld, P. C. (1990). Predicting achievement early and late in the

semester: The role of motivation and use of learning strategies. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82, 41-50

29

Self-efficacy

29

Pressley, M., Borkowski, J. G., & Schneider, W. (1987). Cognitive strategies: Good
strategy users coordinate metacognition and knowledge. In R. Vasta & G. Whitehursi. (Eds.),
Annals of Child Development (Vol. 5, pp. 89-129). New York: JAI Press.

Randhawa, B. S., Beamer, J. E., & Lundberg, I. (1993). Role of mathematics self-efficacy
in the structural model of mathematics achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85,
41-48.

Relich, J. D., Debus, R. L., & Walker, R. (1986). The mediating role of attribution and
self-efficacy variables for treatment effects on achievement outcomes. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 11, 195-216.
Rosenberg, M., & Kapland, H. B. (1982). Social psychology of the self-concept.

Arlington Heights, IL: Harlan Davidson.
Schunk, D. H. (1981). Modeling and attributional effects on children's achievement: A
self-efficacy analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73, 93-105.
Schunk, D. H. (1982a). Effects of effort attributional feedback on children's perceived
self-efficacy and achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 548-556.
Schunk, D. H. (1982b). Verbal self-regulation as a facilitator of children's achievement
and self-efficacy. Human Learning, 1, 265-277
Schunk, D. H. (1983). Developing children's self-efficacy and skills: The roles of social
comparative information and goal setting. Contemporary Educational f'sychology, 8, 76-86
Schunk, D. H. (1984). Self-efficacy perspective on achievement behavior. Educational
Psychologist, 19, 48-58.
Schunk, D. H. (1985). Self-efficacy and classroom learning. Psychology in the Schools,
2, 208-123.

Schunk. D. H. (1987). Peer models and children's behavioral change. Review of

Educational Research, 57, 149-174.
Schunk, D. H. (1989). Self-efficacy and achievement behaviors. Educational Psychology
Review, 1, 173-208.

30

Self-efficacy

30

Schur.k, D. H. (1991). Self-efficacy and academic motivation. Educational Psychologist,
26, 207-231.

Schunk, D. H., & Cox, P. D. (1986). Strategy training and attributional feedback with

learning disabled students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78, 201-209.
Schunk, D. H., & Gunn, T. P. (1985). Modeled importance of task strategies and

achievement beliefs: Effects on self-efficacy and skill development. Journal of Early
Adolescence, 5, 247-258.

Schunk, D. H., & Gunn, T. P. (1986). Self-efficacy and skill development: Influence of

task strategies and attributions. Journal of Educational Research, 79, 238-244.
Schunk, D. H., & Hanson, A. R. (1985). Peer models: Influence on children's self-

efficacy and achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 313-322.
Schunk, D. H.. & Hanson, A. R. (1988). Influence of peer-model attributes on children's
beliefs and learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 431-434.
Schunk, D. H., & Rice, J. M. (1993). Strategy fading and progress feedback: Effects on

self-efficacy and comprehension among students receiving remedial reading services. Journal of
Special Education. 27. 257-276.
Shavelson, R. J., & Bolus. R. (1982). Self-concept: The interplay of theory and models.

Journal of Educcfional Psychology. 74, 3-17.
Shavelson, R. J., Hubner, J. J., & Stanton, G. C. (1976). Self-concept: Validation of
construct interpretations. Review of Educational Research, 46, 407-441.
Shell. D. F., Murphy. C. C., & Bruning. R. H. (1989). Self-efficacy and outcome
expectancy mechanisms in reading and writing achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology,
81, 91-100.

Smith. R. J., Arnkoff. D. B.. & Wright, T. L. (1990). Test anxiety and academic
competence: A comparison of alternative models. Journal of Counseling Psychology. 37,
313-321.

Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioural change.

Advances in Behavioural Research and Therapy, 1. 211-215.

31

Self-efficacy

31

Thorndike, R. L.(1986). The role of general ability in prediction. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 29, 332-329.

Valiante, G., & Pajares, F. (1995). Predictive utility, causal influence, and root causes of
the writing self-efficacy beliefs of upper elementary students. Manuscript in preparation.

Vollmer, F. (1986a). The relationship between expectancy and academic achievement:

How can it be explained? British Journal of Educational Psychology, 56, 64-74.
Weiner, B. (1979). A theory of motivation for some classroom experiences. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 71, 3-25.
Wigfield, A., & Eccles, J. (1992). The development of achievement task values: A
theoretical analysis. Developmental review, 12, 265-310.

Wilhite, S. C. (1990). Self-efficacy, locus of control, self-assessment of memory ability,

and study activities as predictors of college course achievement. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82, 696-700.

Wood, R. E., & Bandura, A. (1989). Impact of conceptions of ability on self-regulatory
mechanisms and complex decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56,
407-415.

Wood, R. E., & Locke, E. A. (1987). The relation of self-efficacy and grade goals to
academic performance. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 47, 1013-1024.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Bandura, A. (1994). Impact of self-regulatory influences on writing

course attainment. American Educational Research Journal, 31, 845-862.
Zimmerman, B. J., Bandura, A., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1992). Self-motivation for
academic attainment: The role of self-efficacy beliefs and personal goal setting. American

Educational Research Journal, 29, 663-676.
Zimmerman, B., & Ringle, J. (1981). Effects of model persistence and statement of
confidence on children's self-efficacy and problem-solving. Journal of Educational Psychology,
-3, 485-493.

Self-efficacy

32

Table 1.

Means, Standard Deviations, and Zero-order Correlations of Variables in the
Path Analysis (Pajares & Miller, 1994a)

Variable

HSL

M

4.9

SD

1.2

GENDER

HSL

CC

USE

MSC

MAS

MSE

.11*

6.0 -.07

.15**

CC

10.3

USE

50.9

15.2

.05

.12*

.06

MSC

49.7

16.6

.13*

.48***

.25***

.40***

MAS

31.8

10.9

.15**

.44***

.20***

.32***

.87***

MSE

73.6

10.5

.24***

.47***

.23***

.19***

.61***

.56***

PERF

14.1

2.8

.17***

.44***

.23***

.14**

.54***

.51***

.70***

HSL = High school level; CC = College credits earned; MSE = Math self-efficacy;
MSC = Math self-concept; MAS = Math anxiety; USE = Perceived usefulness of
mathematics; PERF = Math problem-solving performance.

* p < .05

** p < .01

*** p < A031

33

Self-efficacy
Figure 1.

33

Path model representing significant path coefficients between variables
predicting mathematics problem-solving (Pajares & Miller, I 994a).

R " .99

R= .76

.84

34

R = .98

= .69

Self-efficacy

34

Table 2.
Zero-order Correlations Between Variables in the Study (Pajares & Johnson, 1995)

1.

GENDER

2.

ETHNIC BACKGROUND

3.

AGE

4.

APTITUDE

5.

.04

14.6

0.59

.00

2.S

0.92

-.13

APPREHENSION

60.4

12.74

.13

6.

SELF-CONCEPT

49.2

13.54

-.25**

7.

SELF-EFFICACY

75.9

20.27

.09

8.

PERFORMANCE

3.7

1.08

-.00

P < .05.

Note.

* P c

.001.

-.05

.37**

-.14

-.22**

.16

.22

-.22**

.39
.43

-.27**

.38
.41

-.47***

.51

-.27**

.60*

-.48***

.47*

.60

P c .0001

1. For GENDER, girls were coded 0; boys were coded 1.
2. For ETANIC BACKGROUND, Hispanic students were coded 0; non-Hispanic White

students were coded 1.
in this analysis.

African American or Asian American students were not included

Self-efficacy
Figure 2.

35

Path model representing significant path coefficients between variables

predicting essay-writing performance (Pajares & Johnson, 1995).

R-

R .99

WRITING
PERFORMANCE

R .90

R

.69

Self-efficacy

36

Table 3.

Means, Standard Deviations, and Zero-order Correlations for Variables in the Study (Pajares &
Kranzler, 1994).

Variable

1.

GENDER

2.

RACE

3.

RAVEN

4.

SD

M

2

1

3

4

6

5

7

.02

.31***

19.0

5.9

.04

HSL

5.0

1.4

-.03

5.

MAS

25.8

8.7

-.28*** -.12*

6.

MSC

52.3

13.8

.27***

.12*

.41***

.27***-.81***

7.

MSE

81.5

16.3

.10

.21**

.48***

.35***-.53***

.55***

8.

PERF

9.4

4.3

.02

.33***

.63***

.52***-.46***

.49***

.64***

9.

CAL

11.2

3.1

.04

.',5***

.42***

.38 * ** - .26 * **

.31***

.17**

Note:

8

.40***

.15**

-.43*** -.16**

.67***

RAVEN = General Mental Ability; HSL = High school level;
MSE = Math self-efficacy; MAS = Math anxiety; MSC = Math selfconcept; PERF = Math problem-solving performance;
CAL = Calibration score

* 2 <

.05.

** 2 <

.001.

*** 2 < .0001.

N

=

329

Self-efficacy
Figure 3.

37

Path model representing significant path coefficients between variables

predicting mathematics problem-solving (Pajares & Kranzler, 1994).

R

.99

R= .78

MATHEMATICS
PERFORMANCE

HIGH SCHOOL
MATHEMATIC
EVEL

R = .92

R

.62

.85

38

Self-efficacy
Figure 4.

Multiple mathematics self-efficacy assessments to predict solving math problems

and selecting math-related majors (Pajares & Miller, 1995)

Mathematics Problems
Self-Efficacy

rc

Mathematics
Problem-solving
Performance
Math-Related Tasks
Self-Efficacy

Selection of
Math-Related
Major
Math-Related Courses
Self- Efficacy

Figure 5.

38

Mathematics self-efficacy assessment matched to related outcomes.

Mathematics Problems
Self-Efficacy

Mathematics
Problem-solving
Performance

Selection of
Math - Related
Major
Math-Related Courses
Self-Efficacy

3;i

