The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research
Author(s): Scott Shane and S. Venkataraman
Reviewed work(s):
Source: The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 25, No. 1 (Jan., 2000), pp. 217-226
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/259271 .
Accessed: 21/02/2013 10:28
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Review.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

t Academy of Management Review
2000, Vol. 25, No. 1, 217-226.

NOTE
THE PROMISE OF ENTREPRENEURSHIPAS A
FIELD OF RESEARCH
SCOTT SHANE
Universityof Maryland
S. VENKATARAMAN
Universityof Virginia
To date, the phenomenon of entrepreneurshiphas lacked a conceptual framework.In
this note we draw upon previous research conducted in the differentsocial science
disciplines and applied fields of business to create a conceptual frameworkforthe
field. With this frameworkwe explain a set of empirical phenomena and predict a set
of outcomes not explained or predicted by conceptual frameworks already in existence in other fields.

For a field of social science to have usefulness, it must have a conceptual frameworkthat
explains and predicts a set of empirical phenomena not explained or predicted by conceptual frameworks already in existence in other
fields. To date, the phenomenon of entrepreneurship has lacked such a conceptual framework. Rather than explaining and predicting a
unique set of empirical phenomena, entrepreneurship has become a broad label under which
a hodgepodge of research is housed. What appears to constitute entrepreneurship research
today is some aspect of the setting (e.g., small
businesses or new firms),rather than a unique
conceptual domain. As a result, many people
have had trouble identifyingthe distinctive contribution of the field to the broader domain of
business studies, undermining the field's legitimacy. Researchers in other fields ask why entrepreneurship research is necessary if it does
not explain or predict empirical phenomena beyond what is known fromwork in other fields.
Moreover, the lack of a conceptual framework
has precluded the development of an understanding of many importantphenomena not adequately explained by other fields.
One example of this problem is the focus in
the entrepreneurship literature on the relative
We acknowledge the helpful comments of Ed Roberts on
an earlier draftof this note. The authors contributedequally
and are listed alphabetically.

performance of individuals or firmsin the context of small or new businesses. Since strategic
management scholars examine the differences
in and sustainability ofrelative performancebetween competitive firms,this approach is not
unique (Venkataraman, 1997). Moreover, the approach does not provide an adequate test of
entrepreneurship, since entrepreneurship is
concerned with the discovery and exploitation
of profitable opportunities. A performance advantage over other firmsis not a sufficientmeasure of entrepreneurial performance,because a
performance advantage may be insufficientto
compensate forthe opportunitycost of other alternatives,a liquidity premium fortime and capital, and a premium for uncertainty bearing.
Therefore,although a conceptual frameworkto
explain and predict relative performance between firmsis useful to strategic management,
it is not sufficientforentrepreneurship.
We attempt an integrating frameworkforthe
entrepreneurship field in the formof this note.
We believe that this frameworkwill help entrepreneurship researchers recognize the relationship among the multitude of necessary, but not
sufficient,factors that compose entrepreneurship, and therebyadvance the quality of empirical and theoretical work in the field. By providing a framework that both sheds light on
unexplained phenomena and enhances the
quality of research, we seek to enhance the
field's legitimacy and prevent its marginaliza-

217

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Academy of Management Review

218

tion as only "a research setting" or "teaching
application."
The note proceeds as follows. First,we define
the domain of the field. Second, we explain why
organizational researchers should study entrepreneurship. Third, we describe why entrepreneurial opportunities exist and why some people, and not others, discover and exploit those
opportunities. Fourth, we consider the different
modes of exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities. Finally, we conclude with brief reflections on the potential value of the framework
presented here.

DEFINITIONOF ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Perhaps the largest obstacle in creating a conceptual framework for the entrepreneurship
field has been its definition. To date, most researchers have defined the field solely in terms
of who the entrepreneur is and what he or she
does (Venkataraman, 1997). The problem with
this approach is that entrepreneurship involves
the nexus of two phenomena: the presence of
lucrative opportunities and the presence of enterprising individuals (Venkataraman, 1997). By
defining the field in terms of the individual
alone, entrepreneurship researchers have generated incomplete definitions that do not withstand the scrutiny of other scholars (Gartner,

1988).

The definitionof an entrepreneuras a person
who establishes a new organization is an example of this problem. Because this definitiondoes
not include consideration of the variation in the
quality of opportunities that differentpeople
identify,it leads researchers to neglect to measure opportunities. Consequently, empirical
support (or lack of support) for attributes that
differentiateentrepreneurs fromother members
of society is often questionable, because these
attributes confound the influence of opportunities and individuals.
In contrast to previous research, we define the
field of entrepreneurshipas the scholarly examination of how, by whom, and with what effects
opportunities to create future goods and services are discovered, evaluated, and exploited
(Venkataraman, 1997). Consequently, the field
involves the study of sources of opportunities;
the processes of discovery, evaluation, and ex-

January

ploitation of opportunities; and the set of individuals who discover, evaluate, and exploit
them.
Although the phenomenon of entrepreneurship provides research questions for many different scholarly fields,1 organization scholars
are fundamentally concerned with three sets of
research questions about entrepreneurship:
(1) why, when, and how opportunities for the
creation of goods and services come into existence; (2) why, when, and how some people and
not others discover and exploit these opportunities; and (3) why,when, and how differentmodes
of action are used to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities.
Before reviewing existing research to answer
these questions, we provide several caveats
about our approach. First,we take a disequilibrium approach, which differsfromequilibrium
approaches in economics (Khilstrom& Laffont,
1979) and social psychology (McClelland, 1961).
In equilibrium models, entrepreneurial opportunities either do not exist or are assumed to be
randomly distributed across the population. Because people in equilibrium models cannot discover opportunities that differ in value from
those discovered by others, who becomes an
entrepreneurin these models depends solely on
the attributes of people. For example, in
Khilstrom and Laffont's (1979) equilibrium
model, entrepreneurs are people who preferuncertainty.
Although we believe that some dimensions of
equilibrium models are useful for understanding entrepreneurship,we argue that these models are necessarily incomplete. Entrepreneurial
behavior is transitory (Carroll & Mosakowski,
1987).Moreover,estimates of the number of people who engage in entrepreneurial behavior
range from20 percent of the population (Reynolds & White, 1997) to over 50 percent (Aldrich &
Zimmer, 1986). Since a large and diverse group
of people engage in the transitoryprocess of
entrepreneurship,it is improbable that entrepreneurship can be explained solely by referenceto
a characteristic of certain people independent of
the situations in which they find themselves.
Therefore,when we argue that some people and

'For example, economists are interested in the distribution of entrepreneurial talent across productive and unproductive activities (Baumol, 1996).

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2000

Shane and Venkataraman

not others engage in entrepreneurial behavior,
we are describing the tendency of certain people to respond to the situational cues of opportunities-not a stable characteristic that differentiates some people from others across all
situations.2
Second, we argue that entrepreneurship does
not require, but can include, the creation of new
organizations. As Amit, Glosten, and Mueller
(1993) and Casson (1982) explain, entrepreneurship can also occur within an existing organization. Moreover, opportunities can be sold to
other individuals or to existing organizations. In
this note we do not examine the creation of new
organizations per se but, rather,referinterested
readers to excellent reviews on firmcreation in
organizational ecology (Aldrich, 1990; Singh &
Lumsden, 1990), economics (Caves, 1998;
Geroski, 1995),and organizational theory(Gartner, 1985; Katz & Gartner, 1988; Low & MacMilIaxn,1988).3
Third, our frameworkcomplements sociological and economic work in which researchers
have examined the population-level factorsthat
influence firmcreation. Stinchcombe (1965) identified societal factorsthat enhance incentives to
organize and organizing ability. Aldrich (1990)
and Singh and Lumsden (1990) have provided
reviews of factorsenhancing firmfoundings and
have described the effects of such factors as
environmental carrying capacity, interpopulation processes, and institutional factors. Similarly, Baumol (1996) has related the institutional
environment to the supply of people who are
willing to create firms.
Although these other frameworks are valuable to entrepreneurship scholars, they involve
a set of issues differentfromthose with which
we are concerned. Our frameworkdiffersfrom
these in that (1) we focus on the existence, discovery, and exploitation of opportunities; (2) we
examine the influence of individuals and opportunities, rather than environmental antecedents
and consequences; and (3) we consider a framework broader than firmcreation.

2 We also argue that entrepreneurshipcan be undertaken
by a single individual or a set of people who undertake the
steps of the process collectively or independently.
3 Many researchers argue that entrepreneurship occurs
for reasons other than for profit (see Roberts, 1991, for a
review), but we discuss only for-profit
entrepreneurship.

219

Fourth, our framework also complements research on the process of firmcreation (e.g., Gartner, 1985; Katz & Gartner, 1988; Katz, 1993). Explaining this process is important,but research
on it involves examining a differentset of issues
from those we explore. Firm creation process
researchers examine resource mobilization, firm
organizing, and market making, starting with
the assumption that opportunities exist, have
been discovered, and will be exploited through
the creation of new firms. Since we lack the
space to review both the processes of entrepreneurship through market mechanisms and
throughfirmcreation, we limit our discussion to
the conditions under which entrepreneurial opportunitiesare exploited throughfirmsand markets, and we referreaders to these other frameworks for information on the process of firm
creation.

WHY STUDY ENTREPRENEURSHIP?
Many scholars ask, either implicitlyor explicitly,why anyone should study entrepreneurship.
Data are difficultto obtain, theory is underdeveloped, and many findings to date are the
same as those obtained in other areas of business. In response, we offer three reasons for
studying the topic. First, much technical information is ultimately embodied in products and
services (Arrow,1962),and entrepreneurshipis a
mechanism by which society converts technical
information into these products and services.
Second, entrepreneurship is a mechanism
through which temporal and spatial inefficiencies in an economy are discovered and mitigated (Kirzner, 1997). Finally, of the different
sources of change in a capitalist society, Schumpeter (1934) isolated entrepreneuriallydriven innovation in products and processes as the crucial engine driving the change process.
Therefore,the absence of entrepreneurshipfrom
our collective theories of markets,firms,organizations, and change makes our understanding
of the business landscape incomplete. As Baumol eloquently remarks, the study of business
without an understanding of entrepreneurship
is like the study of Shakespeare in which "the
Prince of Denmark has been expunged fromthe
discussion of Hamlet" (1989: 66).

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

220

Academy of Management Review

THE EXISTENCE, DISCOVERY, AND
EXPLOITATION OF ENTREPRENEURIAL
OPPORTUNITIES
The Existence of Entrepreneurial Opportunities
To have entrepreneurship,you must firsthave
entrepreneurial opportunities. Entrepreneurial
opportunities are those situations in which new
goods, services, raw materials, and organizing
methods can be introduced and sold at greater
than their cost of production (Casson, 1982). Although recognition of entrepreneurial opportunities is a subjective process, the opportunities
themselves are objective phenomena that are
not known to all parties at all times. For example, the discovery of the telephone created new
opportunities forcommunication, whether or not
people discovered those opportunities.
Entrepreneurial opportunities differfromthe
larger set of all opportunities forprofit,particularly opportunities to enhance the efficiencyof
existing goods, services, raw materials, and organizing methods, because the formerrequire
the discovery of new means-ends relationships,
whereas the latter involve optimization within
existing means-ends frameworks(Kirzner,1997).
Because the range of options and the consequences of exploiting new things are unknown,
entrepreneurial decisions cannot be made
through an optimization process in which mechanical calculations are made in response to a
given set of alternatives (Baumol, 1993).
Entrepreneurial opportunities come in a variety of forms. Although the focus in most prior
research has been on opportunities in product
markets (Venkataraman, 1997), opportunities
also exist in factormarkets,as in the case of the
discovery of new materials (Schumpeter, 1934).
Moreover, within product market entrepreneurship, Drucker (1985)has described three different
categories of opportunities: (1) the creation of
new information,as occurs with the invention of
new technologies; (2) the exploitation of market
inefficiencies that result frominformationasymmetry, as occurs across time and geography;
and (3) the reaction to shiftsin the relative costs
and benefits of alternative uses forresources, as
occurs with political, regulatory, or demographic changes.
Previous researchers have argued that entrepreneurial opportunities exist primarily because differentmembers of society have different beliefs about the relative value of resources,

January

given the potential to transformthem into a differentstate (Kirzner,1997). Because people possess differentbeliefs (because of a lucky hunch,
superior intuition,or private information),they
make differentconjectures about the price at
which markets should clear or about what possible new markets could be created in the future.
When buyers and sellers have differentbeliefs
about the value of resources, both today and in
the future,goods and services can sell above or
below theirmarginal cost of production (Schumpeter, 1934).An entrepreneurial discovery occurs
when someone makes the conjecture that a set
of resources is not put to its "best use" (i.e., the
resources are priced "too low," given a belief
about the price at which the output fromtheir
combination could be sold in another location,
at another time, or in another form).If the conjecture is acted upon and is correct,the individual will earn an entrepreneurial profit.If the
conjecture is acted upon and is incorrect,the
individual will incur an entrepreneurial loss
(Casson, 1982).
Entrepreneurship requires that people hold
differentbeliefs about the value of resources for
two reasons. First, entrepreneurship involves
joint production, where several different resources have to be broughttogetherto create the
new product or service. For the entrepreneurto
obtain controlover these resources in a way that
makes the opportunityprofitable,his or her conjecture about the accuracy of resource prices
must differfromthose of resource owners and
other potential entrepreneurs (Casson, 1982). If
resource owners had the same conjectures as
the entrepreneur,they would seek to appropriate the profitfromthe opportunityby pricing the
resources so that the entrepreneur's profitapproached zero. Therefore, for entrepreneurship
to occur, the resource owners must not share
completely the entrepreneur's conjectures. Second, if all people (potential entrepreneurs) possessed the same entrepreneurial conjectures,
they would compete to capture the same entrepreneurial profit,dividing it to the point that the
incentive to pursue the opportunitywas eliminated (Schumpeter, 1934).
But why should people possess differentbeliefs about the prices at which markets should
clear? Two answers have been offered.First,as
Kirzner (1973) has observed, the process of discovery in a market setting requires the participants to guess each other's expectations about a

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2000

Shane and Venkataraman

wide variety of things. People make decisions
on the basis of hunches, intuition, heuristics,
and accurate and inaccurate information,causing their decisions to be incorrect some of the
time. Since decisions are not always correct,this
process leads to "errors" that create shortages,
surpluses, and misallocated resources. An individual alert to the presence of an "error" may
buy resources where prices are "too low," recombine them,and sell the outputs where prices are
"too high."
Second, as Schumpeter (1934)explained, economies operate in a constant state of disequilibrium.Technological, political, social, regulatory,
and other types of change offera continuous
supply of new informationabout differentways
to use resources to enhance wealth. By making it
possible to transform resources into a more
valuable form,the new informationalters the
value of resources and, therefore,the resources'
proper equilibrium price. Because informationis
imperfectlydistributed, all economic actors do
not receive new informationat the same time.
Consequently, some people obtain information
before others about resources lying fallow, new
discoveries being made, or new markets opening up. If economic actors obtain new information before others, they can purchase resources
at below their equilibrium value and earn an
entrepreneurial profit by recombining the resources and then selling them (Schumpeter,
1934).
The informationalsources of opportunitymay
be easier to see in the case of new technology,
but they need not be restrictedto technological
developments. For example, the production of
the movie Titanic generated new information
about who was a desirable teen idol. An entrepreneur could respond to this new information
by acting on the conjecture that posters of Leonardo DeCaprio would sell forgreater than their
cost of production.
Because entrepreneurial opportunities depend on asymmetries of informationand beliefs,
eventually, entrepreneurial opportunities become cost inefficientto pursue. First,the opportunityto earn entrepreneurial profitwill provide
an incentive to many economic actors. As opportunities are exploited, information diffuses to
other members of society who can imitate the
innovator and appropriate some of the innovator'sentrepreneurial profit.Although the entryof
imitating entrepreneurs initially may validate

221

the opportunityand increase overall demand,
competition eventually begins to dominate
(Hannan & Freeman, 1984). When the entry of
additional entrepreneurs reaches a rate at
which the benefits fromnew entrants exceeds
the costs, the incentive forpeople to pursue the
opportunity is reduced, because the entrepreneurial profitbecomes divided among more and
more actors (Schumpeter, 1934).
Second, the exploitation of opportunity provides information to resource providers about
the value of the resources that they possess and
leads them to raise resource prices over time, in
order to capture some of the entrepreneur's
profitforthemselves (Kirzner,1997).In short,the
diffusionof informationand learning about the
accuracy of decisions over time, combined with
the lure of profit,will reduce the incentive for
people to pursue any given opportunity.
The duration of any given opportunity depends on a variety of factors. The provision of
monopoly rights, as occurs with patent protection or an exclusive contract,increases the duration. Similarly, the slowness of information
diffusion or the lags in the timeliness with
which others recognize information also increase the duration, particularlyiftime provides
reinforcingadvantages, such as occur with the
adoption of technical standards or learning
curves. Finally, the "inability of others (due to
various isolating mechanisms) to imitate, substitute, trade for or acquire the rare resources
required to drive down the surplus" (Venkataraman, 1997: 133) increases the duration.
The Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Although an opportunityfor entrepreneurial
profitmight exist, an individual can earn this
profitonly ifhe or she recognizes that the opportunityexists and has value. Given that an asymmetryof beliefs is a precondition for the existence of entrepreneurial opportunities, all
opportunities must not be obvious to everyone
all of the time (Hayek, 1945).At any point in time,
only some subset of the population will discover
a given opportunity(Kirzner,1973).
Why do some people and not others discover
particular entrepreneurial opportunities? Although the null hypothesis is blind luck, research has suggested two broad categories of
factorsthat influence the probability that particular people will discover particular opportuni-

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

222

Academy of Management Review

ties: (1) the possession of the prior information
necessary to identifyan opportunityand (2) the
cognitive properties necessary to value it.
Informationcorridors.Human beings all possess differentstocks of information,and these
stocks of informationinfluencetheirability to recognize particularopportunities.Stocks of information create mental schemas, which provide a
frameworkfor recognizing new information.To
recognize an opportunity,an entrepreneurhas to
have priorinformationthatis complementarywith
the new information,which triggersan entrepreneurial conjecture(Kaish & Gilad, 1987).This prior
informationmightbe about user needs (Von Hippel, 1986) or specific aspects of the production
function(Bruderl,Preisendorfer,& Ziegler, 1992).
The information necessary to recognize any
given opportunity is not widely distributed
across the population because of the specialization of informationin society (Hayek, 1945). People specialize in informationbecause specialized information is more useful than general
information for most activities (Becker & Murphy, 1992).As a result,no two people share all of
the same informationat the same time. Rather,
informationabout underutilized resources, new
technology, unsated demand, and political and
regulatory shifts is distributed according to the
idiosyncratic life circumstances of each person
in the population (Venkataraman, 1997).
The development of the Internet provides a
useful example. Only a subset of the population
has had entrepreneurial conjectures in response
to the development of this technology. Some
people still do not know what the Internetis or
that profitable opportunities exist to exploit it.
Cognitive properties. Since the discovery of
entrepreneurial opportunities is not an optimization process by which people make mechanical calculations in response to a given a set of
alternatives imposed upon them (Baumol, 1993),
people must be able to identifynew means-ends
relationships that are generated by a given
change in order to discover entrepreneurial opportunities.Even if a person possesses the prior
informationnecessary to discover an opportunity,he or she may fail to do so because of an
inability to see new means-ends relationships.
Unfortunately,visualizing these relationships is
difficult.Rosenberg (1994) points out that history
is rife with examples in which inventors failed
to see commercial opportunities (new meansends relationships) that resulted fromthe inven-

January

tion of important technologies-from the telegraph to the laser.
Priorresearch has shown that people differin
their ability to identifysuch relationships. For
example, research in the field of cognitive science has shown that people vary in their abilities to combine existing concepts and information into new ideas (see Ward, Smith, & Vaid,
1997,forseveral review articles). Recently,a few
researchers have begun to evaluate empirically
the role that cognitive properties play in the
discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities (see
Busenitz & Barney, 1996; Kaish & Gilad, 1991;
Shaver & Scott, 1991). For example, Sarasvathy,
Simon, and Lave (1998)have shown that successfulentrepreneurssee opportunities in situations
in which other people tend to see risks,whereas
Baron (in press) has found that entrepreneurs
may be more likely than other persons to discover opportunities because they are less likely
to engage in counterfactual thinking (i.e., less
likely to invest time and effortimaging what
"might have been" in a given situation), less
likely to experience regretover missed opportunities, and are less susceptible to inaction inertia.
The Decision to Exploit Entrepreneurial
Opportunities
Although the discovery of an opportunityis a
necessary condition for entrepreneurship, it is
not sufficient.Subsequent to the discovery of an
opportunity,a potential entrepreneur must decide to exploit the opportunity.We do not have
precise figures on the aborting of discovered
opportunities, but we do know that not all discovered opportunities are brought to fruition.
Why, when, and how do some people and not
others exploit the opportunities that they discover? The answer again appears to be a function of the joint characteristics of the opportunity
and the nature of the individual (Venkataraman,
1997).
Nature of the opportunity.The characteristics
of opportunities themselves influence the willingness of people to exploit them. Entrepreneurial opportunities vary on several dimensions,
which influences their expected value. For example, a cure for lung cancer has greater expected value than does a solution to students'
need forsnacks at a local high school. The exploitation of an entrepreneurial opportunityre-

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2000

Shane and Venkataraman

quires the entrepreneur to believe that the expected value of the entrepreneurial profitwill be
large enough to compensate forthe opportunity
cost of other alternatives (including the loss of
leisure), the lack of liquidity of the investmentof
time and money, and a premium for bearing
uncertainty(Kirzner,1973; Schumpeter, 1934).
To date, research has shown that,on average,
entrepreneurs exploit opportunities having
higher expected value. In particular, exploitation is more common when expected demand is
large (Schmookler, 1966; Schumpeter, 1934), industry profitmargins are high (Dunne, Roberts,
& Samuelson, 1988),the technology life cycle is
young (Utterback, 1994),the density of competition in a particular opportunityspace is neither
too low nor too high (Hannan & Freeman, 1984),
the cost of capital is low (Shane, 1996),and population-level learning from other entrants is
available (Aldrich & Wiedenmeyer, 1993).
Individual differences.Not all potential entrepreneurs will exploit opportunities with the
same expected value. The decision to exploit an
opportunityinvolves weighing the value of the
opportunity against the costs to generate that
value and the costs to generate value in other
ways. Thus, people consider the opportunity
cost of pursuing alternative activities in making
the decision whether or not to exploit opportunities and pursue opportunities when their opportunitycost is lower (Amit,Mueller, & Cockburn,
1995; Reynolds, 1987). In addition, people consider theircosts forobtaining the resources necessary to exploit the opportunity.For example,
Evans and Leighton (1991) showed that the exploitation of opportunities is more common
when people have greater financial capital.
Similarly, Aldrich and Zimmer (1986) reviewed
research findings that showed that strongersocial ties to resource providers facilitate the acquisition of resources and enhance the probability of opportunityexploitation. Furthermore,
Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg (1989) found that
people are more likely to exploit opportunities if
they have developed useful informationforentrepreneurshipfromtheirprevious employment,
presumably because such informationreduces
the cost of opportunityexploitation. Finally, the
transferabilityof informationfromthe prior experience to the opportunity(Cooper et al., 1989),
as well as prior entrepreneurial experience
(Carroll & Mosakowski, 1987), increases the

223

probability of exploitation of entrepreneurial
opportunitybecause learning reduces its cost.
The decision to exploit an entrepreneurial opportunityis also influenced by individual differences in perceptions. The creation of new products and markets involves downside risk,
because time, effort,and money must be invested before the distribution of the returns is
known (Knight, 1921; Venkataraman; 1997). Several researchers have argued that individual
differences in the willingness to bear this risk
influence the decision to exploit entrepreneurial
opportunities (Khilstrom& Laffont,1979; Knight,
1921).For example, people who exploit opportunities tend to frame informationmore positively
and then respond to these positive perceptions
(Palich & Bagby, 1995).
The decision to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities is also influenced by individual differences in optimism. People who exploit opportunities typically perceive their chances of
success as much higher than they really areand much higher than those of others in their
industry (Cooper, Woo, & Dunkelberg, 1988).
Moreover, when these people create new firms,
they oftenenter industries in which scale economies play an importantrole at less than minimum efficientscale (Audretsch, 1991),and they
enter industries at rates exceeding the equilibrium number of firms(Gort & Klepper, 1982).4
However, in most industries, at most points in
time,most new firmsfail (Dunne et al., 1988),and
few firmsever displace incumbents (Audretsch,
1991),suggesting that people who exploit opportunities,on average, are overly optimistic about
the value of the opportunitiestheydiscover. This
overoptimism motivates the exploitation of opportunity by limiting information,stimulating
rosy forecasts of the future (Kahneman &
Lovallo, 1994), triggering the search for relatively small amounts of information (Kaish &
Gilad, 1991),and leading people to act firstand
analyze later (Busenitz & Barney, 1997).
Other individual differences may be important in explaining the willingness to exploit opportunities. Researchers have argued that people with greater self-efficacyand more internal
locus of control are more likely to exploit opportunities,because exploitation requires people to

4 The informationsignals generated by the entrepreneurial process are weak.

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

224

January

Academy of Management Review

act in the face of skepticism of others (Chen,
Greene, & Crick, 1998).Similarly, opportunityexploitation involves ambiguity, and people who
have a greater tolerance forambiguity may be
more likely to exploit opportunities (Begley &
Boyd, 1987).Finally, the exploitation of opportunity is a setting in which people can achieve,
providing a valuable cue forthose who possess
a high need forachievement (McClelland, 1961).
Consequently, those who are high in need for
achievement may be more likely than other
members of society to exploit opportunities.
Readers should note that the attributes that
increase the probability of opportunityexploitation do not necessarily increase the probability
of success. For example, overoptimism mightbe
associated with a higher probability of both exploitation and failure. Of the population of individuals who discover opportunities in a given
industry,those who are pessimistic may choose
not to exploit discovered opportunities because
they more accurately estimate what it will take
to compete and how many other people will try
to do similar things. Overoptimistic individuals
do not stop themselves from exploiting these
opportunities, because their overoptimism limits informationand motivates rosy forecasts of
the future.

MODES OF EXPLOITATION
Anothercritical question concerns how the exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities is organized in the economy. Two major institutional
arrangements for the exploitation of these
opportunities exist-the creation of new firms
(hierarchies) and the sale of opportunities to existing firms (markets)-but the common assumption is that most entrepreneurial activity
occurs throughde novo startups. However, people within organizations who discover opportunities sometimes pursue those opportunities on
behalf of theirexisting organizations and sometimes establish new organizations, whereas
independent actors sometimes sell their opportunities to existing organizations and sometimes establish new organizations to pursue the
opportunities.
Research shows that the choice of mode depends on the nature of the industrial organization,the opportunity,and the appropriability regime. Research in industrial organization has

shown that entrepreneurship is less likely to
take the formof de novo startups when capital
market imperfectionsmake it difficultfor independent entrepreneurs to secure financing (Cohen & Levin, 1989). Entrepreneurship is more
likely when the pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunityrequires the effortof individuals who
lack incentives to do so in large organizations;
when scale economies, firstmover advantages,
and learning curves do not provide advantages
to existing firms (Cohen & Levin, 1989); and
when industries have low barriers to entry(Acs
& Audretsch, 1987). Research on the appropriability of informationhas shown that entrepreneurship is more likely to take the formof de
novo startups when informationcannot be protected well by intellectual propertylaws, inhibiting the sale of entrepreneurial opportunities
(Cohen & Levin, 1989). Finally, research on the
nature of opportunitieshas shown that entrepreneurship is more likely to take the formof de
novo startups when opportunities are more uncertain (Casson, 1982), when opportunities do
not require complementary assets (Teece, 1986),
and when opportunities destroy competence
(Tushman & Anderson, 1986).

CONCLUSION
Entrepreneurship is an important and relevant field of study. Although those in the field
face many difficult questions, we have presented a frameworkforexploring them. We recognize that we may have offeredsome uncertain
assumptions, potentially flawed logical arguments, or have made statements that will prove,
ultimately,to be inconsistent with data yet to be
collected. Nevertheless, this framework provides a starting point. Since it incorporates informationgained frommany disciplinary vantage points and explored through many
differentmethodologies, we hope that it will
prod scholars frommany differentfields to join
us in the quest to create a systematic body of
information about entrepreneurship. Many
skeptics claim that the creation of such a body of
theoryand the subsequent assembly of empirical support for it are impossible. We hope that
other scholars will join our effortto prove those
skeptics wrong.

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Shane and Venkataraman

2000

REFERENCES
Acs, Z., & Audretsch, D. 1987. Innovation, market structure,
and firmsize. Review of Economics and Statistics, 71:
567-574.
Aldrich, H. 1990. Using an ecological perspective to study
organizational founding rates. EntrepreneurshipTheory
and Practice, Spring: 7-24.

225

Casson, M. 1982. The entrepreneur. Totowa, NJ: Barnes &
Noble Books.
Caves, R. 1998. Industrial organization and new findings on
the turnoverand mobility of firms.Journal of Economic
Literature,36: 1947-1982.
Chen, C., Greene, P., & Crick, A. 1998. Does entrepreneurial
self-efficacydistinguish entrepreneurs frommanagers?
Journal of Business Venturing,13: 295-316.

Aldrich, H., & Wiedenmeyer, G. 1993. From traits to rates:
An ecological perspective on organizational foundings.
Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and
Growth, 1: 145-195.

Cohen, W., & Levin, R. 1989. Empirical studies of innovation
and market structure. In R. Schmalensee & R. Willig
(Eds.), Handbook of industrial organization, vol. II: 10601107. New York: Elsevier.

Aldrich, H., & Zimmer, C. 1986. Entrepreneurship through
social networks. In D. Sexton & R. Smilor (Eds.). The art
and science of entrepreneurship.3-23. Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger.

Cooper, A., Woo, C., & Dunkelberg, W. 1988. Entrepreneurs'
perceived chances forsuccess. Journalof Business Venturing,3: 97-108.

Amit,R., Glosten, L., & Mueller, E. 1993.Challenges to theory
development in entrepreneurship research. Journal of
Management Studies, 30: 815-834.
Amit,R., Mueller, E., & Cockburn, I. 1995. Opportunitycosts
and entrepreneurial activity.Journalof Business Venturing, 10: 95-106.
Arrow, K. 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In R. Nelson (Ed.), The rate and
direction of inventive activity:Economic and social factors: 609-626. Princeton,NJ:Princeton UniversityPress.
Audretsch, D. 1991. New firmsurvival and the technological
regime. Review of Economics and Statistics, 68: 520-526.
Baron, R. In press. Counterfactual thinkingand venture formation: The potential effects of thinking about "what
might have been." Journal of Business Venturing.
Baumol, W. J. 1989. Entrepreneurship in economic theory.
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings:
64-71.
Baumol, W. 1993.Formal entrepreneurshiptheoryin economics: Existence and bounds. Journal of Business Venturing, 8: 197-210.
Baumol, W. 1996. Entrepreneurship,management, and the
structureof payoffs. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Becker, G., & Murphy,K. 1992. The division of labor, coordination costs, and knowledge. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: 1137-1160.
Begley, T., & Boyd, D. 1987. Psychological characteristics
associated with performance in entrepreneurial firms
and smaller businesses. Journal of Business Venturing,
2: 79-93.
Bruderl, J., Preisendorfer, P., & Ziegler, R. 1992. Survival
chances of newly founded business organizations.
American Sociological Review, 57: 227-242.
Busenitz, L., & Barney, J.1997.Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations: Biases and
heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journalof Business Venturing,12: 9-30.
Carroll, G., & Mosakowski, E. 1987. The career dynamics of
self-employment.Administrative Science Quarterly, 32:
570-589.

Cooper, A., Woo, C., & Dunkelberg, W. 1989. Entrepreneurship and the initial size of firms.Journal of Business
Venturing,4: 317-332.
Drucker, P. 1985. Innovation and entrepreneurship. New
York: Harper & Row.
Dunne, T., Roberts,M., & Samuelson, L. 1988.Patterns of firm
entry and exit in U.S. manufacturing industries. Rand
Journal of Economics, 19: 495-515.
Evans, D., & Leighton, L. 1989. Some empirical aspects of
entrepreneurship. American Economic Review, 79:
519-535.
Gartner,W. 1985.A conceptual frameworkfordescribing the
phenomenon of new venture creation. Academy of Management Review, 10: 696-706.
Gartner, W. B. 1988. Who is the entrepreneur? is the wrong
question. American Journalof Small Business, 12: 11-32.
Geroski, P. 1995. What do we know about entry? International Journalof Industrial Organization, 13: 421-440.
Gort, M., & Klepper, S. 1982. Time paths in the diffusion of
product innovations. Economic Journal,92: 630-653.
Hannan, M., & Freeman, J.1984.Structuralinertia and organizational change. American Sociological Review, 49:
149-164.
Hayek, F. 1945. The use of knowledge in society. American
Economic Review, 35: 519-530.
Kahneman, D., & Lovallo, D. 1994. Timid choices and bold
forecasts: A cognitive perspective on risk taking. In R. P.
Rumelt, D. E. Schendel, & D. Teece (Eds.), Fundamental
issues in strategy: A research agenda: 71-96. Boston:
Ballinger.
Kaish, S., & Gilad, B. 1991. Characteristics of opportunities
search of entrepreneurs versus executives: Sources, interests, and general alertness. Journal of Business Venturing,6: 45-61.
Katz, J.,& Gartner, W. 1988. Properties of emerging organizations. Academy of Management Review, 13: 429-441.
Khilstrom,R., & Laffont,J.1979.A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theoryof firmformationbased on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy, 87: 719-748.
Kirzner,I. 1973.Competition and entrepreneurship.Chicago:
Universityof Chicago Press.

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

226

Academy of Management Review

Kirzner,I. 1997. Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process: An Austrian approach. Journal of
Economic Literature,35: 60-85.

January

Schumpeter, J. 1934. Capitalism, socialism, and democracy.
New York: Harper & Row.

Knight, F. 1921. Risk, uncertainty and profit. New York:
Augustus Kelley.

Shane, S. 1996.Explaining variation in rates ofentrepreneurship in the United States: 1899-1988.Journalof Management, 22: 747-781.

Low, M., & MacMillan, I. 1988. Entrepreneurship: Past research and futurechallenges. Journal of Management,
14: 139-161.

Shaver, K. G., & Scott,L. R. 1991.Person, process, and choice:
The psychology of new venture creation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Winter:23-42.

McClelland, D. 1961. The achieving society. Princeton, NJ:
Van Nostrand.

Singh, J.,& Lumsden, C. 1990.Theory and research in organizational ecology. Annual Review of Sociology, 16:
161-195.

Palich, L., & Bagby, R. 1995.Using cognitive theoryto explain
entrepreneurial risk-taking: Challenging conventional
wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing,10: 425-438.
Reynolds, P. 1987. New firms: Societal contribution versus
survival potential. Journal of Business Venturing, 2:
231-246.
Reynolds, P., & White, S. 1997. The entrepreneurial process.
Greenwich, CT: Greenwood Press.
Roberts, E. 1991. Entrepreneursin high technology: Lessons
from MIT and beyond. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Rosenberg, N. 1994. Uncertaintyand technological change.
Conference on growthand development: The economics
of the 21st century. Stanford, CA: Stanford University,
Center forEconomic Policy Research.

Stinchcombe, A. 1965. Social structure and organizations.
In J. March (Ed.), Handbook of organizations: 260-290.
Chicago: Rand McNally.
Teece, D. 1986. Profitingfromtechnological innovation: Implications for integration,collaboration, licensing, and
public policy. Research Policy, 15: 286-305.
Tushman, M., & Anderson, P. 1986. Technological discontinuities and organizational environments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 31: 439-465.
Utterback, J. 1994. Mastering the dynamics of innovation.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Venkataraman, S. 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An editor's perspective. In J.Katz & R.
Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, firm
emergence, and growth,vol. 3:119-138. Greenwich, CT:
JAIPress.

Sarasvathy, D., Simon, H., & Lave, L. 1998. Perceiving and
managing business risks: Differences between entrepreneurs and bankers. Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 33: 207-225.

Von Hippel, E. 1986. Lead users: A source of novel product
concepts. Management Science, 32: 791-805.

Schmookler, J. 1966. Invention and economic growth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress.

Ward, T., Smith, S., & Vaid, J.(Eds.). 1997. Creative thought.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Scott Shane is associate professor of entrepreneurship in the Robert H. Smith School
of Business and director of research at the Dingman Center forEntrepreneurshipat
the Universityof Maryland. He received his Ph.D. fromthe Universityof Pennsylvania.
His currentresearch focuses on entrepreneurship in high-technologysettings.
S. Venkataraman is the Samuel L. Slover Associate Professorof Business Administration and directorof research at the Batten Center forEntrepreneurialLeadership in the
Darden Graduate School of Business Administrationat the Universityof Virginia. He
received his Ph.D. fromthe Universityof Minnesota. His currentresearch focuses on
entrepreneurship theory.

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

