Describing the creative design process by
the integration of engineering design and
cognitive psychology literature
T. J. Howard, S. J. Culley and E. Dekoninck, Innovative Manufacturing
Research Centre, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
In this paper a ‘creative design process’ is proposed, based on an integration
between a modernised consensus view of both the design process from
engineering design and the creative process from cognitive psychology. In
addition, a composite deﬁnition of a creative design output is also formed, taking
elements from the diﬀerent design types proposed in engineering design and the
creative outputs proposed in psychology. This integrated process and the
composite deﬁnition are further linked, thus providing a descriptive model the
diﬀerent design operations are linked to the types of design output produced.
Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: design process, creative process, engineering design, psychology

C

reativity is an integral and essential part of the engineering design
process. Without creativity in design there is no potential for innovation, which is where creative ideas are actually implemented (Mumford and Gustafson, 1988; Amabile, 1996) and transformed into commercial
value (Thompson and Lordan, 1999; Culley, 2002). To emphasise this importance, recent ﬁgures were released from the UK treasury concluding that the
top innovating companies produce 75% of revenue from products or services
that did not exist 5 years ago (Cox, 2005). Within industry, creativity does not
necessarily equate to success; however, without it, based on the above observation (Cox, 2005), long-term failure is a near certainty.

Corresponding author:
T. J. Howard
t.j.howard@bath.ac.
uk

Having a full understanding of the processes that lead to creative designs over
routine designs is of great interest to both individuals and organisations. There
has been work (Chapman, 2006) to establish design processes to enable more
creativity; these process models are often termed ‘innovation processes’. However, to date there are no descriptive innovation process models able to make
clear and consistent distinction between a design path leading to a routine
product from a path leading to a creative product. By comparing literature
from engineering design with creativity literature from cognitive psychology,
this paper highlights some key areas for design researchers to consider. The integration, in some manner, of a creative process with the overall design process
www.elsevier.com/locate/destud
0142-694X $ - see front matter Design Studies 29 (2008) 160e180
doi:10.1016/j.destud.2008.01.001
Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Printed in Great Britain

160

may also help engineers to better utilise creativity tools, methods and techniques from both engineering and psychology.

1

Scope of review

In order to conduct this cross disciplinary research, the authors ﬁrst aimed to
identify areas in both engineering design and cognitive psychology literature
that are directly comparable, thus making the knowledge transferable. During
this initial scoping, it was realised that in psychology it is common to refer
to creativity in reference to the four main areas by which it is researched,
namely the creative ‘process’, the creative ‘product (output)’, the creative
‘person’ and the creative ‘environment’ (Rhodes, 1961; Murdock and Puccio,
1993; Basadur et al., 2000). In the domain of engineering design it would appear that leading authors categorise design into broadly similar sections using
the terms, the design ‘problem’, the design ‘process’, the design ‘types (output)’, the design ‘activity’ and the design ‘organisation/team/personnel’
(Pahl and Beitz, 1984; Ulrich and Eppinger, 1995; Ullman, 1997; Cross, 2000).
The authors previously observed that the engineering design process had many
similarities to the creative processes (Howard et al., 2007). In addition, it was
seen that the characterised ‘design outputs’ commonly referred to in engineering design literature, show many similarities with the creative product
described in psychology research literature. It was therefore decided that the
scope of this paper would attempt to assess and integrate the diﬀerent perspectives of the two domains with respect to ‘process’ related research (Section 2)
and ‘product’ or ‘output’ related research (Section 3). The last two issues considered by the researchers in the psychology area of ‘person’ and ‘environment’
are clearly important areas for understanding and supporting creativity, however, they are considered outside the scope of this paper. In Section 4 the ﬁndings from the previous sections are brought together to link the design process
to the design outputs.

2

The process of creative design

The process by which innovation takes place can be thought of as some form
of black box processing large amounts of design related information in order
to produce a variety of design outputs, some of which will be ‘creative’.
Scholars have made attempts to describe and formalise both the engineering
design process (Section 2.1) and the creative process (Section 2.2), producing
generic models that have been broadly accepted as good representations by
both research communities. This paper suggests a descriptive, creative design
process that is an integration of the engineering design process and the creative
process.
The following sections summarise the key elements of the diﬀerent engineering
design process models and creative process models. Though several forms of

Describing the creative design process

161

process representation have been published from each domain, what can be
thought of as the ‘linear style’ is by far the most dominant in both domains
and therefore has been the focus of the work on which this paper has been
based. The section concludes with a comparison between the perspectives
from each domain (Section 2.3) and a proposed descriptive model of integrating the two perspectives (Section 2.4).

2.1

The engineering design process

The understanding of the design process is important both to manage the design activity and to aid the improvement of products and the overall eﬃciency
of engineering based companies; it is also the foundation on which a lot of
design research is based. It is suggested that understanding this process relative
to the creative process will give insight into where and when resources should
be focused in order to enhance creative performance and also the resulting
‘quality’ of the product designed. Thus this section introduces a framework
(Table 1) which has been generated to deﬁne the boundaries of the design process, highlighting the commonalities and diﬀerences between the phases it contains. It is based on a detailed analysisof many existing engineering design
process models of which 23 are shown in Table 1.
There are a number of notable diﬀerences between the models, of particular
interest are the divergenteconvergent models, which include controlled convergence (Pugh, 1991) and the double diamond (Design Council, 2006) in
Table 1. These divergenteconvergent models diﬀer from the traditional linear
style by assuming some form of integrated evaluation and selection of ideas
and concepts. This is potentially a useful outlook on design from a creativity
perspective, as separating the generation and evaluation periods is considered
good practice for both lateral thinking and brainstorming (Osborn, 1953).
Another slightly atypical form of representation can be described as a ‘knowledge space model’. Here it is assumed that a certain quantity of knowledge
must be gained for each phase of the process in order to complete a design. These
spaces can be ﬁlled in random order or sequence, though there are certain dependencies inbuilt within each design project, i.e. one space cannot gain anymore
relevant information until knowledge is gained in another space. A prime example of this type of representation is the CeK theory (Hatchuel and Weil, 2003)
which describes design as a process of movement between a concept space and
a knowledge space. These types of model are probably valid and representative
of actual design activities, though it is clear that their high level description
makes them less useful to designers. Interestingly, this type of representation
did not correspond to the boundaries set by the framework in Table 1.
The column headings used in Table 1 demonstrate the general agreement of
design authors on common e often synonymously named e stages. The six
headings comprise the four major design phases: ‘analysis of task, ‘conceptual

162

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

Describing the creative design process

Table 1 A comparison of engineering design process models
Models

Establishing a need phase

Analysis of task phase

Conceptual design phase

X

New product strategy
development

Idea
Screening &
Business analysis
generation evaluation

Programming data collection

Booz et al. (1967)
Archer (1968)

X

Svensson (1974)

Need

Wilson (1980)

Societal need

X
Recognize &
formalize

Analysis

Verification

Development

Testing

Implementation phase
Commercialisation

Communication

X

X

Manufacture

Decisions

Analyze and/or test

Ideate and create

Detailed design phase

Development

Synthesis

Concepts
FR's &
constraints

Embodiment design phase

Product, prototype, process

X
Introduction Life cycle
(launch) management

Urban and Hauser
(1980)

Opportunity identification

VDI-2222 (1982)

X

Planning

Conceptual design

Embodiment design

Detail design

X

Hubka and Eder (1982)

X

X

Conceptual design

Lay-out design

Detail design

X
Commercialisation

Testing

Design

Crawford (1984)

X

Strategic planning

Concept generation

Pre-technical evaluation

Technical development

Pahl and Beitz (1984)

Task

Clarification of task

Conceptual design

Embodiment design

Detailed design

X

French (1985)

Need

Detailing

X

Recognise problem

Conceptual design
Search for alternative
proposals

Embodiment of schemes

Ray (1985)

Analysis of problem
Exploration of
Define
problem
problem

Cooper (1986)

Ideation

Preliminary investigation

Detailed investigation

Andreasen and Hein
(1987)
Pugh (1991)

Recognition of need

Investigation of need

Product principle

Market

Specification

Hales (1993)

Idea, need, proposal, brief

Baxter (1995)

Assess innovation
opportunity

Ulrich and Eppinger
(1995)
Ullman (1997)

Identify
needs

Product design

Judge feasible
alternatives

Specify
solution

X
Production preparation

Concept design

Detail design

Task clarification

Embodiment design

Detail design

Possible products

Possible concepts

Possible embodiments

Possible details

Strategic planning

Plan for the
design process

Develop engineering
specifications

Concept

Test for feasible
alternatives
Testing &
Development
Validation

Conceptual design

X

BS7000 (1997)

Predict
outcome

Concept development

System-level design

Detail design

Implement
Full production & market
launch
Execution
Manufacture

New product

X

Implementation (or realisation)

Black (1999)

Brief/concept

Review of ‘state of the art’

Synthesis Inspiration

Cross (2000)

X

Exploration

Generation

Design Council (2006)

Discover

Define

Industrial Innovation
Process 2006

Mission statement

Market research

Experimentation

Analysis /
reflect

Develop
Ideas phase

Synthesis

Evaluation

Termination
Decisions to constraints Output

Communication

X
X
X

Deliver
Concept phase

Production
ramp-up

Testing &
refinement

Develop product

Develop concept

Feasibility

Sell

X

Feasibility Phase

Pre production

163

design’, ‘embodiment design’ and ‘detailed design’. Preceding these four
phases is the ‘Establishing a Need’ phase, where the driver for the design is recognised. With just few exceptions (Urban and Hauser, 1980; Baxter, 1995), it is
noticeable that nearly all processes assume a market driven process as opposed
to a technology driven process. Following the four major phases is the ‘implementation phase’, which is included by several authors, explaining what happens when the ﬁnal engineering ‘drawings’ and instructions are completed. The
implementation phase contains only post-design activities and is therefore not
the focus of this paper.
It would appear, due to frequent use and reference, that these traditional,
linear models (Table 1) of the design process are eﬀective for teaching novice
designers and for managing the design process, i.e. for building stage gates
upon. However, it is evident that the engineering design process models are
poor with regards to representing creative processes. In Table 1 there is one
exception in the Fashion and Textile design process proposed by Black
(1999), which includes two phases of ‘synthesis’ and a phase for ‘inspiration’
both commonly used to describe the creative process (see Table 2). It was
also recognised that these linear representations are poor for research purposes
particularly for mounting creative tools and processes, partly due to the ‘idealistic’ way by which they are depicted (Parnes and Clements, 1986).
In order to address this gap, the authors have related this traditional linear
view, to a more complex or sophisticated outlook of the design process as proposed by Gero (2004), relating design to function, behaviour and structure
(FBS). It is possible to link the FBS framework (Gero, 2004) to three of the
four major design phases of the standard engineering design process as illustrated in Figure 1. Here it is suggested that the functions are set within or
are analogous to the analysis of task phase, the behaviour of the design is
formed in the conceptual design phase and the structure is established during
the embodiment phase.
It will be seen that this framework, with its strong links to the usual representations of the design process, can be extremely useful in integrating the engineering design process and the creative process, Section 2.4.

2.2

The creative process

Psychologists can be split into two categories as described by Boden (1990),
namely the romantics and non-romantics. The romantics take a more spiritual
view of creativity where it is viewed as a mysterious, subconscious process
(Barron and Harrington, 1981; Plsek, 1997). This is still quite a common
view of the creative process, however, this outlook provides little help to research in engineering design. Conversely, the non-romantic view has a number
of very interesting aspects which will be used in this work. Thus the following
subsection will take the reader through the diﬀerent descriptions of several

164

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

Describing the creative design process

Table 2 A comparison of creative process models
Models

Analysis phase

Helmholtz (1826)

Saturation

Dewey (1910)

Kris (1952)
Polya (1957)

Jones (1970)

Devising a plan

Recognition Definition

Amabile (1983)

Couger et al. (1993)
Shneiderman (2000)
Basadur et al. (2000)
Kryssanov et al. (2001)

X

Inspiration

Elaboration

Communication

Carrying out the plan

Looking Back

X

Divergence

Convergence

X

Synthesis

Evaluation

Presentation

Idea-finding

Solution-finding

X

Idea-finding

Solution-finding

Analysis

Fact-finding
Fact-finding

Search for data

Divergent
Understand the problem
Fact-finding
X

Problemfinding

Problem or task
presentation
X

Acceptance-finding
X

Hypothesis formulation

Hypothesis testing

Communication of results

Idea-finding

Solution-finding

Acceptance-finding

Response generation

Response validation

Outcome

Conception
Framing
problem
Compiling
information

Gestation

Parturition

X

Generating ideas

Developing solutions

Generating ideas

Evaluating,
prioritising ideas

Bring up the baby
Building
acceptance

Functional
requirements

Fact finding

Problem defn.
Structural
requirements

Idea finding
Diverge – converge at each stage
Analogies,
Functional solutions
metaphors

Appraising
tasks

Designing
process

Developing an implementation plan

Create

Donate (communicate)

Relate
Problem finding

Action

Convergent
Judgement

Preparation

Exploring
Constructing
data
opportunities
Opportunity, delineation,
problem definition
Collect

Illumination

Transformation
Flashes of insight
Pattern finding

Problemfinding

Mess finding

Barron and Harrington
(1981)
Isaksen et al. (1994)

Preparation

Problem,
challenge,
opportunity

Stein (1974)
Parnes (1981)

Verification

Develop some possible solutions

X

Osborn (1963)
Parnes (1967)

X
Experience collaboration of conjectural
solution

X
Understanding the
problem

Guilford (1957)
Buhl (1960)

X

Incubation

Preparation

Wallas (1926)

Communication / implementation phase

Implications of solutions
through reasoning

Illumination

Incubation

Definition and location
of difficulty

A felt difficulty

Evaluation phase

Generation phase

Evaluate and select
Reinterpretation

Plan

Acceptance
X

Action

165

Figure 1 Relationship between
FBS (Gero, 2004) and the
design process

non-romantic views on creativity. A comparative summary of the process
models can be found in Table 2, from which conclusions will be drawn.
Similar to the design process the representation of the creative process takes
several forms within the literature. But interestingly, even in the psychology
domain, the form is predominantly described as a linear sequence of steps
or stages. Earlier descriptions of the creative process, coined by Shneiderman
(2000) as ‘inspirationalist’ views, are perhaps the most valuable to engineering
design. One of the older process models is the four-stage process oﬀered by
Wallas (1926) which although it remains the most well recognised of all creative process models, through his stages of preparation, incubation, illumination and veriﬁcation, has some critics. This model suggests the sudden
emergence of an idea, which is now often deemed somewhat outdated. More
recent descriptions, coined by Shneiderman (2000) as ‘structuralist’, attempt
to oﬀer an explanation to emergence, describing conscious idea generation
as the deliberate connection of matrices of thought (Koestler, 1964). This process is likened to belief by Amabile (1983), where new ideas are generated
through the combination of two or more old, existing ideas and is typical of
a structuralist view. Both of these views on idea generation stem from Aristotle’s rules of association, though it is noted that neither can distinguish
between a process leading to a creative idea and one producing a routine idea.
As with the engineering design process, there are instances of the divergente
convergent style representations of the creative process from psychology literature. It was possible to position some of these processes within Table 2 as
they were deemed to be hybrids incorporating divergenteconvergent stages
into the more common linear process (Guilford, 1957; Jones, 1970;
Basadur et al., 2000). Nevertheless, this paper will concentrate on the linear
style processes which dominate the representations in Table 2. In constructing this table the 19 process models from the literature were analysed in detail
and the various phases were compared and then grouped. It was then

166

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

possible to create four major groupings, which arguably represent the major
phases of a creative process as seen by the researchers in the psychology
domain. Broadly put, these phases are analysis, generation, evaluation and
communication/implementation.
Analysis of the table shows that over time, there has been a general shift from
describing the creative process as subconscious cognitive phases (Helmholtz,
1826; Wallas, 1926; Kris, 1952) to activity-based stages (Jones, 1970; Parnes,
1981; Amabile, 1983). It therefore must be noted that due to this shift,
phases e particularly in the generation column e are not precisely synonymous.
For the purpose of this paper the authors argue that the creative process ends
with the evaluation stage, as the communication/implementation phase should
be deemed a design activity. Thus the generic creative process model used for
this research contains the three stages of analysis, generation and evaluation.

2.3

Comparison between the ‘processes’
of design and creativity

The previous subsections have created the summary Tables 1 and 2 which contain the major elements identiﬁed by authors within the engineering design
process (23 in total) and the work on the creative process from the psychology
perspective (19 in total). In this section the various views are compared to understand the basis for the integrated model that is presented in Section 2.4. One
notable similarity between the processes is the need for information, its analysis and understanding during the initial phases (‘analysis of task phase’ and
‘analysis phase’). This phase is almost identical in both processes and is therefore a central component of the proposed integrated process.
The main diﬀerences arise when assessing the conceptual design phase and the
embodiment design phase. It would appear that both of these phases contain
all three phases of the creative process, namely analysis, generation and evaluation. This emphasises the ﬁner level of granularity of the creative process,
where it is seen to repeat continually throughout the ﬁrst three stages of the
design process.
Following the embodiment stage is the detailed design phase when engineering designers produce formal communication documents for manufacture/
implementation. In descriptions of the creative process this stage involves
the less formal externalising or sharing of the idea and is judged by many
to be in addition to the creative process.
In more recent research (Basadur et al., 2000; Kryssanov et al., 2001) psychologists have moved from thinking of the creative process as a cognitive process
to a more activity-based one, more analogous to the design process. In doing
this, many recent creative process models could, interestingly, be interpreted as
extremely generic design process models. This is an interesting convergence of

Describing the creative design process

167

ideas for engineering design authors who have promoted similar ideas for
some time (Archer, 1968; Booz et al., 1968). Conversely, the linear engineering
design process has remained relatively unchanged, the major developments really only being the inclusion of more feedback loops and the acknowledgment
that the design process is more erratic than most representations suggest
(Parnes and Clements, 1986; Bucciarelli, 1994).

2.4

Integrated model of the ‘process’ of creative design

In this subsection the authors will attempt to map the consensus of creative
processes (analysis, generation and evaluation) onto a view of the design process. In doing this speciﬁc creativity tools can be created and or positioned for
their eﬀective use in the design process. For reasons discussed in Section 2.1
the authors have adopted the function, behaviour and structure (FBS) model
of design (Gero, 2004).
Figure 2 shows an enhanced version of the FBS model. In grey are the eight
diﬀerent design operations proposed by Gero (2004) (described in Table 3).
This splits the behaviour components into expected behaviour (Be) for generative steps and the behaviour derived from the structure (Bs) for evaluative
steps. The solid lines represent the diﬀerent design operations (transformations
and comparisons) of the FBS approach which can be found listed in Table 3.
Mapped onto this FBS model are the three creative process elements, shown in
black, with the important information transfers shown as dotted lines. Table 3
is also then extended to show how each design operation relates to the stages of
the creative process. This gives a view of the creative process from the domain
of psychology compared to the view of the design process from the domain of
engineering design. The analysis phase is considered central to this model representing the continual interpretation and use of information which is seen as
essential to the creative process. It is believed by the authors that the addition
of this ‘analysis’ component is an important addition to the model. The previous FBS framework (Gero, 2004) did not take into account the continual

Figure 2 Integrated creative design process model

168

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

Table 3 The FBS framework key (Gero, 2004)

Design operation
from (Figure 2)

Descriptions of the activities that make
up design (Gero, 2004)

Nature of the activities
in creative process terms

Formulation
(process 1)

Transforms the design requirements, expressed in
function (F), into behaviour (Be) that is expected
to enable this function.
Transforms the expected behaviour (Be) into a solution
structure (S) that is intended to exhibit this desired behaviour.
Derives the ‘actual’ behaviour (Bs) from the synthesized
structure (S).
Compares the behaviour derived from structure (Bs) with
the expected behaviour to prepare the decision if the design
solution is to be accepted.
Produces the design description (D) for constructing or
manufacturing the product.
Addresses changes in the design state space in terms
of structure variables or ranges of values for them if
the actual behaviour is evaluated to be unsatisfactory.
Addresses changes in the design state space in terms
of behaviour variables or ranges of values for them if
the actual behaviour is evaluated to be unsatisfactory.
Addresses changes in the design state space in terms of
function variables or ranges of values for them if
the actual behaviour is evaluated to be unsatisfactory.

Generation

Synthesis
(process 2)
Analysis
(process 3)
Evaluation
(process 4)
Documentation
(process 5)
Reformulation
type 1 (process 6)
Reformulation
type 2 (process 7)
Reformulation
type 3 (process 8)

Generation
Evaluation
Evaluation

N/A
Generation

Generation

Generation

growth and manipulation of design information throughout the design process, which was previously encapsulated by the ‘analysis of task’ phase and
the feedback loops.
Figure 2 along with Table 3 shows that transformations 1, 2, 6, 7 and 8 are directly related to the generation stage of the creative process. Operations 3 and
4 are directly linked to the evaluation phase of the creative process. Transformation 5 is deemed as routine design and therefore does not feature in the
creative process.
The above model (Figure 2) is a representation linking both the creative
process and the engineering design process in a novel and useful manner. In
particular it shows the separate ways by which it is possible to assess the generation phases of the creative process in terms of engineering design. This will
enable researchers to categorise and focus creative idea generation tools to suit
the particular stage or activity that the designer is actually undertaking.
Although considered good representation by the authors, this model, along
with all the other processes reviewed in both domains, shows no link to
what is referred to as the creative design output (Section 3). It therefore
does not make any diﬀerentiation between a process leading to a creative design over one leading to a routine design. Thus the creative design output will
be discussed and developed in Section 3 with its concluding links to the creative design process being presented in Section 4.

Describing the creative design process

169

3

The creative design output

A clear deﬁnition of, or a metric for assessing creative design outputs consisting of measurable elements, would enable researchers to gauge the eﬀectiveness of any new creativity tools or methods proposed. In this section it will
be shown that the classiﬁcation of ‘design outputs’ (Section 3.1) in the domain
of engineering design e often referred to as design types e closely relates to the
research performed by psychologists involving ‘creative outputs’ (Section 3.2).
A comparison between the two diﬀerent views is produced (Section 3.3)
followed by a tabulated model (Table 6) describing how they intersect with
respect to the design process. This will help to produce a composite deﬁnition
of a creative design output in Section 3.4.

3.1

Engineering design outputs

Throughout design research, categorising the diﬀerent outputs of design has
proven to be useful for both analysis and the construction of tools, methods
and techniques. The diﬀerent output types are generally related to a design
output’s distance from the current paradigm, and are often independent of
the discipline or domain. Numerous researchers from the ﬁeld of engineering
design have identiﬁed diﬀerent design outputs, for example the well referenced
and simple classiﬁcation system oﬀered by Pahl and Beitz (1984) detailing
three primary classes of design.
Original design: An original solution principle for a system with the same,
a similar or a new task.
Adaptive design: Adapting a known solution principle to satisfy a new or
changed task.
Variant design: Varying the certain aspects of the system leaving the function
and solution principle unchanged.
As with the above scheme, many of the output categories proposed by the
various authors clearly diﬀer in the levels of creativity, or at least the novelty,
expected to be produced. Table 4 shows how the various authors categorise the
diﬀerent design outputs, where the columns are organised to exhibit the
Table 4 Design output categories

Level of eﬀect

Matousek (1963)
Gasson (1973)
Pahl and Beitz (1984)
Black (1989)
Henderson (1990)
Culverhouse (1993)
Ullman (1997)
Gero (2001)

170

Most original

Least original

Behavioural

Functional

Structural

Incremental

New
Original
Original
Innovative
Radical
Innovative
Original
Creative

Adaptive
Extensional
Adaptive
Adaptive
X
Strategic
Redesign
Innovative

X
Transitional
Variant
Variant
Modular/architectural
Variant
Conﬁguration
X

Development
X
X
Order
Incremental
Repeat order
Selection
Routine

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

synonymous or closely related design types. The columns are ordered from left
to right, decreasing in the levels creativity expected for each design type. Headings were chosen to describe the level at which each design type has the most
noticeable eﬀect.
It would appear that by Pahl and Beitz’s (1984) deﬁnition, the diﬀering design
types are clearly related to the design process and thus to the FBS model
(Gero, 2004), where ‘original’ design is assigned to an original ‘behaviour’
and ‘adaptive’ design to original ‘function’. The authors consider these design
type classiﬁcations to work over the spectrum of systems’ levels, for example
on a ‘system’ level a product may be of type ‘variant’, however, it may be adaptive and original at ‘component’ and ‘sub-component’ levels. The knowledge
of this relationship will add to the composite deﬁnition described at the end
of this Section 3.4.
It was observed that several of the authors also view these design outputs from
the initial problem or activity perspective (Ullman, 1997). In which case, it is
thought that the designers begin their design work with a notion that the eventual product will be either innovative, adaptive, variant or to order (Table 4)
and thus perform the appropriate activity (design type).
While these diﬀerent design types have the essence of varying levels of creativity, within their deﬁnitions they do not explicitly distinguish what is a creative/
inventive design from what is a routine design. Ottosson (2001) states that for
a product to be new, technically it must have 60% of new or redesigned parts
and from a marketing point of view, it needs to be considered new to the market.
In engineering design there is one accepted judgment of inventiveness, and it relates to the designs’ patentability. In order to become an invention or be granted
a patent a design must fulﬁl the following criteria (The Patent Oﬃce, 2007):
 Be new e the invention must never have been made public in any way, anywhere in the world, before the date on which an application for a patent is
ﬁled.
 Be capable of industrial application e an invention must be capable of being made or used in some kind of industry. This means that the invention
must take the practical form of an apparatus or device, a product such as
some new material or substance or an industrial process or method of
operation.
 Involve an inventive step e an invention involves an inventive step if, when
compared with what is already known, it would not be obvious to someone
with a good knowledge and experience of the subject.
Interestingly the ﬁrst two criteria resemble elements that are used by psychologists to characterise a creative output (i.e. novelty and appropriateness, see
Section 3.2). The term unobvious as the third criteria provides a revised

Describing the creative design process

171

deﬁnition of a creative output presented previously (Howard et al., 2006), see
Table 5.

3.2

Creative output

When deﬁning the creative output it is important to note that an output is considered to be a single idea (Howard et al., 2006). Though this is often termed as
the creative product in psychology literature it can cause confusion between
the domains, as engineers think of a product as a ﬁnished artefact, usually
of commercial value.
In the romantic view, the creative output is considered something magical,
astonishing (Boden, 1990) or godlike (Goldenberg and Mazursky, 2002), however, most scientiﬁc literature describes a creative output as something both
original and appropriate. Table 5 displays the various deﬁnitions of the
non-romantic views of the creative output. It can be seen that the two main
elements of originality and appropriateness or their synonyms are present in
all deﬁnitions. Due to the broad nature of this deﬁnition it is common for authors to add some form of third element to their deﬁnitions in order to focus
on the aspect of creativity their particular research deals with (see Table 5).
It is often easy to gauge how appropriate an idea is through simple testing and
evaluation, if it works or ﬁts the speciﬁcation, it is appropriate. Though researchers from other domains emphasise, there is no right or wrong answer:
‘good’ rather than ‘correct’; ‘poor’, rather than ‘wrong’ (Warr, 2007). Other
elements such as originality are less robust in deﬁnition. Boden (1990) distinguishes between an idea that is original to the beholder (P-Creative) and an
idea that is original historically (H-Creative). A good example of this diﬀerentiation in reality is in the gyroscope patent. In 1898 an original patent for
the gyroscope was ﬁnalised, unbeknown that its details could be found in
Leonardo da Vinci’s notebook dating back to the sixteenth century. It could
therefore be argued that the gyroscope patent was P-Creative but not H-Creative.
These two types of originality really divide the domains of engineering and
cognitive psychology. Engineers are far more concerned with H type originality as it enables intellectual property rights such as a patent (see Section 3.1);
psychologists are much more concerned with P type originality, to analyse the
creative processes of individuals.

With regards to assessing what is creative in a speciﬁc case (i.e. original and
appropriate) there are few people who can make this judgment. Amabile
(1983) states that there are few objective methods of evaluating the creativity
of a product, and for the most part, evaluation is done by applying subjective
judgments. This is complemented by Shalley and Gilson (2004) who believe
that only a ﬁeld expert or line manager can judge whether these elements exist
in a particular idea, thus determining whether it is creative or not.

172

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

Describing the creative design process

Table 5 Creative output definition
Deﬁnitions

Originality

Appropriateness

Third Element

Novel Original New Appro- Useful Purpose- Value Meaning- Tenable Satis- UnAdaptive Leap Change Unexpected Communi- Transfor- Comparisons Resourcepriate
ful
ful
fying obvious
cated
mation
ful
Jackson and
Messick
(1965)
Stein (1974)
MacKinnon
(1975)
Rothenberg
and
Hausman
(1976)
Simon (1979)
Amabile
(1983)
Sternberg
(1988)
Lumsdaine
and
Lumsdaine
(1995)
Gero (1996)
Marakas
and Elam
(1997)
Thompson
and Lordan
(1999)
Warr and
O’Neill
(2005)
Chakrabarti
(2006)
Howard
et al. (2006)
Lopez and
Vidal (2006)

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

173

3.3

Comparison between the ‘outputs’ of design and creativity

The most noticeable diﬀerence between the output related deﬁnitions from the
two domains is in the size and complexity of the output being deﬁned. In
engineering design the outputs being deﬁned (the diﬀerent design types) are
complete products, components and solutions, often produced by complete
teams of designers. In the case of psychology research the outputs to be deﬁned
tend to be ‘single ideas’ produced by individuals.
In terms of the characteristics that deﬁne what is creative from what is routine,
psychologists deﬁne the creative output with markedly similar criteria to that
required for an invention or a patentable design. However, the engineering design community appears to go a step further, breaking these designs further
into diﬀerent design types relating to how creative or original particular aspects of each design are. A common theme emerged from the literature deﬁning the diﬀerent design types. This tended to distinguish between the levels of
creativity exhibited at functional, behavioural and structural levels. This trend
is built-in to the composite deﬁnition in the following subsection.

3.4

Composite deﬁnition of the ‘output’ of creative design

In order to form a composite deﬁnition of the creative design output and thus
gain better understanding of the diﬀerent deﬁnitions, it is useful to consider
both views alongside the stages of the design process. Table 6 has been generated using the standardised headings of the design process from Section 2.1
along with its relationship to function, behaviour and structure (described
by Figure 1). Then taking Pahl and Beitz’s (1984) deﬁnitions of design types
as a standard example it is possible to see how the diﬀerent design outputs relate to the design process by the relative position of the creative output, within
the overall process.
Table 6 indicates that if no creative output is produced the design will be routine at best. The three main design types all contain creative outputs, and can
be diﬀerentiated between by the FBS relative position in which this creative
output occurs. It is obvious from Table 6 that the diﬀerent design outputs
are deﬁned from an engineering/technology perspective, deﬁning an original
Table 6 Design process stage of creative output occurrence for each design type

Stage of design process
Analysis of task
(function)
Design outputs

174

Original
Adaptive
Variant
Routine

Conceptual design
(behaviour)

Embodiment design
(structure)

Detailed design

Creative output
Creative output
Creative output

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

output to be related to behaviour and thus the conceptual design phase. A user
orientated classiﬁcation may see original design being related to function and
thus the analysis of task phase (more marketing than engineering) and an architectural orientated classiﬁcation may see original design being related to its
structure.
The following deﬁnitions are constructed in reﬂection of both the deﬁnitions of
design outputs (Section 3.1) and of creative outputs (Section 3.2).
A creative output: An idea that is both original and appropriate.
A creative design output: A design output containing at least one creative output at the systems’ level under study.
A routine design output: A design output containing no creative output at
that particular systems’ level.
In addition consider the following deﬁnitions of the three types of creative
design outputs.
Original design output: A design output in which there is a creative output at
the behavioural level.
Adaptive design output: A design output in which there is a creative output
at the functional level.
Variant design output: A design output in which there is a creative output at
the structural level.
The above deﬁnitions could be useful for categorising products and product
features for research purposes and intellectual property issues. These deﬁnitions are now used within the next section to link the creative design process
to the creative design output.

4

Link between the creative design process and product

Though fundamental to design research, the process and output of creative
design has yet to be linked theoretically or empirically. The following section
will propose a simple model consolidating at least half a centuries worth of
work from both cognitive psychology and engineering design. The model links
the consensus view of the creative design process (Section 2) to the composite
deﬁnition of the creative design output (Section 3).
It became evident that the generation phase of the creative process has the
greatest bearing on the diﬀerent design outputs (Sections 2 and 3). If any
design operation involves a creative generation phase (an original and appropriate idea) then one of the three creative design outputs will be produced. In
the case where several creative generation phases occur at one of the systems’
levels of the design, then it is a hybrid of the design types. It is important to
realise that a routine design has no creative generation phases. Table 7

Describing the creative design process

175

Table 7 Link between creative design process steps and the creative output

Design operations (Figure 2)

Nature of the activities in
creative process terms

Resultant creative
design output

Formulation (process 1)
Synthesis (process 2)
Analysis (process 3)
Evaluation (process 4)
Documentation (process 5)
Reformulation type 1 (process 6)
Reformulation type 2 (process 7)
Reformulation type 3 (process 8)

Generation
Generation
Evaluation
Evaluation
N/A
Generation
Generation
Generation

Original
Variant
N/A
N/A
N/A
Variant
Original
Adaptive

identiﬁes ﬁve design operations that if performed creatively will lead to the
various creative design outputs. The implications of this link between the creative design process and the outputs allow us to position creative design tools
respective to the design operation being performed.
With these mechanisms now realised, research must be conducted at lower
levels of granularity to understand what detailed mechanisms lead to original
and appropriate ideas being produced during the generation phases. In some
preliminary theoretical work (Howard et al., 2006) the authors propose that
whether an idea is creative or routine is dependent on the information inputs
into the process. It is suggested that the ‘obviousness’ and the ‘source’ of the
information is key to this creative generation process and will be investigated
in the following articles.

5

Conclusions

Having reviewed literature from the domains of engineering design and psychology, a creative design process (Figure 2) is proposed as an integration between the engineering design process and the creative process established from
cognitive psychology. Whilst acknowledging that design processes observed in
practice are more erratic than most representations suggest, it is argued that
understanding the linkages in the overall process will help engineers to better
utilise creativity tools, methods and techniques. Insight into this process may
also reveal where and when resources should be focused in order to enhance
creative performance and the quality of the product designed.
A composite deﬁnition of a creative design output is also presented, taking elements from the diﬀerent design types proposed in engineering design and the
creative outputs proposed in psychology. A clear deﬁnition of a creative design
output consisting of measurable elements (originality and appropriateness) will
enable researchers to gauge the eﬀectiveness of any new creativity tools and
methods proposed. The integrated process and composite deﬁnition are linked
within Table 7 stating the process routes leading to the diﬀerent design outputs.

176

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

This deeper understanding will enable more eﬀective tools to be created and
utilised, helping the engineering designer to produce more original ideas or
to reach them more quickly. As it has been shown that information has an important, but not fully understood role, to further the support of creative activities it is clear that studies must be conducted with engineering designers to
audit existing information types and sources used as design inputs. In addition,
prescriptive studies should be conducted with engineering designers to test the
impact of the diﬀerent types of information on creative inspiration at diﬀerent
stages of the design process.

References
Amabile, T (1983) The social psychology of creativity Springer-Verlag, New York
Amabile, T (1996) Creativity in context Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado
Andreasen, M M and Hein, L (1987) Integrated product development IFS
Publications, Bedford
Archer, L B (1968) The structure of design processes Royal College of Art, London
Barron, F and Harrington, D M (1981) Creativity, intelligence and personality
Annual Review of Psychology Vol 32 pp 439e476
Basadur, M, Pringle, P, Speranzini, G and Bacot, M (2000) Collaborative problem
solving through creativity in problem deﬁnition: expanding the pie Creativity and
Innovation Mangement Vol 9 No 1 pp 54e76
Baxter, M (1995) Product design: a practical guide to systematic methods of new
product development Chapman & Hall, New York
Black, I (1989) Product innovation and mechanical CAD: a strategic proposal for
engineering manufacture Computer-aided Engineering Journal Vol 6 No 5 pp 153
Black, S (1999) The fashion and textile design process London College of Fashion,
University of the Arts, London
Boden, M (1990) The creative mind George Weidenfeld and Nicolson Ltd, Great
Britain
Booz, E, Allen, J and Hamilton, C (1968) Management of new products Booz, Allen &
Hamilton Inc., New York
BS7000 (1997) Design management systems. Part 2. Guide to managing the design
of manufactured products BSI, London
Bucciarelli, L L (1994) Designing engineers MIT Press, Mass
Buhl, H (1960) Creative engineering design Iowa State University, Iowa
Chakrabarti, A (2006) Deﬁning and supporting design creativity, in Ninth International Design Conference Design 06, Dubrovnik
Chapman, A (2006) Design process and design management tips Available from:
www.businessballs.com
Cooper, R G (1986) Winning at new products Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.,
Reading, Mass
Couger, J D, Higgins, L F and McIntyre, S C (1993) (Un)Structured creativity in
information systems organizations MIS Quarterly Vol 17 No 4 pp 375e398
Cox, G (2005) Cox review of creativity in business: building on the UK’s strengths
Available from: http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/cox_review/
coxreview_index.cfm
Crawford, C M (1984) Protocol: new tool for product innovation Journal of
Product Innovation Management Vol 1 No 2 pp 85
Cross, N (2000) Engineering design methods strategies for product design Wiley,
Chichester

Describing the creative design process

177

Culley, S J (2002) The innovation debate University of Bath, Bath
Culverhouse, P F (1993) Four design routes in electronics engineering product
development International Journal of Design & Manufacturing Vol 3 No 2 pp
147e158
Design Council (2006) Double diamond design process Available from: http://
www.designcouncil.org.uk/webdav/harmonise?Page/@id¼53&Session/@id¼D_4
jaHtwk0Hj7ve5elIToe&Document/@id¼10149
Dewey, J (1910) How we think D. C. Heath & Co., Boston, Mass
French, M (1985) Conceptual design for engineers The Design Council, London
Gasson, P (1973) Theory of design B T Batsford, London
Gero, J (2001) Mass customisation of creative designs, in International Conference
on Engineering Design, Glasgow
Gero, J S (1996) Creativity, emergence and evolution in design Knowledge-Based
Systems Vol 9 No 7 pp 435e448
Gero, J S (2004) The situated functionebehaviourestructure framework Design
studies Vol 25 No 4 pp 373e391
Goldenberg, J and Mazursky, D (2002) Creativity in product innovation University
Press, Cambridge
Guilford, J P (1957) A revised structure of intellect studies of aptitudes of high-level
personnel University of Southern California, California
Hales, C (1993) Managing engineering design Longman Scientiﬁc and Technical,
England, Harlow
Hatchuel, A and Weil, B (2003) A new approach of innovative design: an
introduction to CeK theory, in International Conference on Engineering Design,
ICED 03, Stockholm
Helmholtz, H (1826) Vortrage and reden in H Eysenck (ed) Genius University
Press, Cambridge
Henderson, R M (1990) Architectural innovation: the reconﬁguration of existing
product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms Administrative Science
Quarterly Vol 35 No 1 pp 9e30
Howard, T J, Culley, S J and Dekoninck, E (2006) Information as an input into
the creative process, in Ninth International Design Conference Design 06,
Dubrovnik
Howard, T J, Culley, S J and Dekoninck, E (2007) Creativity in the engineering design process, in 16th International Conference on Engineering Design, ICED 07, Paris
Hubka, V and Eder, W E (1982) Principles of engineering design Butterworth
Scientiﬁc, London
Isaksen, S G, Dorval, K B and Treﬃnger, D J (1994) Creative approaches to
problem solving Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co., Dubuque, Iowa
Jackson, P W and Messick, S (1965) The person, the product, and the response:
conceptual problems in the assessment of creativity Journal of Personality Vol 33
No 3 pp 309e329
Jones, J C (1970) Design methods: seeds of human futures Wiley-Interscience, New
York
Koestler, A (1964) The act of creation Macmillan, New York
Kris, E (1952) Psychoanalytic explorations in art International Universities Press,
New York
Kryssanov, V V, Tamaki, H and Kitamura, S (2001) Understanding design
fundamentals: how synthesis and analysis drive creativity, resulting in emergence
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Engineering Vol 15 No 4 pp 329e342
Lopez, B and Vidal, R (2006) Novelty matrics in engineering design experiments,
in Ninth International Design Conference Design 06, Dubrovnik

178

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

Lumsdaine, E and Lumsdaine, M (1995) Creative problem solving e thinking skills
for a changing world McGraw-Hill International, New York
MacKinnon, D (1975) An overview of assessment centres Centre for Creative
Leadership, Greensboro, N.C.
Marakas, G M and Elam, J J (1997) Creativity enhancement in problem solving:
through software or process? Management Science Vol 43 No 8 pp 1136e1146
Matousek, R (1963) Engineering design e a systematic approach Blackie & Son,
London
Mumford, M D and Gustafson, S B (1988) Creativity syndrome e integration,
application, and innovation Psychological Bulletin Vol 103 No 1 pp 27e43
Murdock, M C and Puccio, G J (1993) A contextual organizer for conducting
creativity research in Nurturing and developing creativity: the emergence of
a discipline, Ablex, Norwood, NJ pp 249e280
Osborn, A F (1953) Applied imagination: principles and procedures of creative
thinking Scribner, New York
Osborn, A F (1963) Applied imagination: principles and procedures of creative
problem-solving Scribner, New York
Ottosson, S (2001) Dynamic concept development, a key for future proﬁtable
innovations and new product variants, in International Conference on Engineering
Design, Glasgow
Pahl, G and Beitz, W (1984) Engineering design The Design Council, London
Parnes, D and Clements, P (1986) A rational design process: How and why to fake
it IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering Vol 12 No 2 pp 251e257
Parnes, S J (1967) Creative behavior guidebook Scribner, New York
Parnes, S J (1981) The magic of your mind Bearly Limited, New York
Plsek, P E (1997) Creativity, innovation, and quality ASQ Quality Press,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Polya, G (1957) How to solve it Doubleday Anchor Books, New York
Pugh, S (1991) Total design e integrated methods for successful product engineering
Addison-Wesley Publishers Ltd, Strathclyde
Ray, M (1985) Elements of design engineering Prentice-Hall International, UK
Rhodes, M (1961) An analysis of creativity Phi Delta Kappa Vol 42 pp 305e310
Rothenberg, A and Hausman, C R (1976) The creativity question Duke University
Press, Durham, N.C.
Shalley, C E and Gilson, L L (2004) What leaders need to know: a review of social
and contextual factors that can foster or hinder creativity Leadership Quarterly
Vol 15 No 1 pp 33e53
Shneiderman, B (2000) Creating creativity: user interfaces for supporting innovation
ACM Transactions on ComputereHuman Interaction Vol 7 No 1 pp 114e138
Simon, H A (1979) Models of thought Yale University Press, New Haven
Stein, M I (1974) Stimulating creativity Academic Press, New York
Sternberg, R J (1988) The nature of creativity: contemporary psychological
perspectives University Press, Cambridge
Svensson, N (1974) Introduction to engineering design Pitman, Bath
UK Intellectual Property Oﬃce (The Patent Oﬃce) (2007) What is a patent?
Available from: http://www.ipo.gov.uk/whatis/whatis-patent.htm
Thompson, G and Lordan, M (1999) A review of creativity principles applied to
engineering design Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part
E, Journal of Process Mechanical Engineering Vol 213 No E1 pp 17e31
Ullman, D (1997) The mechanical design process McGraw-Hill International, New
York
Ulrich, K T and Eppinger, S D (1995) Product design and development McGrawHill, New York

Describing the creative design process

179

Urban, G L and Hauser, J R (1980) Design and marketing of new products PrenticeHall Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ
VDI-2222 (1982) Design engineering methodics; setting up and use of design of
catalogues VDI Society
Wallas, G (1926) The art of thought Jonathan Cape, London
Warr, A (2007) Understanding and supporting creativity in design University of
Bath, Bath
Warr, A, and O’Neill, E (2005). Understanding design as a social creative process,
in Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Creativity & Cognition, London
Wilson, D R (1980) An exploratory study of complexity in axiomatic design
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mass

180

Design Studies Vol 29 No. 2 March 2008

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on Resear

