Team thinking
that measures

up to the task
at hand.

The Image @anklNishi

0278-6648/94/$4.00 01994 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on October 20, 2008 at 15:41 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE POTENTIALS

Creative problem solving
Spending more time in quadrant C will help your career

Problem solving, as commonly
taught in schools, is an analytical or procedural approach. This approach almost
exclusively employs left-brain thinking
modes, is competitive, and relies on
individual effort. However, creative
problem solving is a framework that
encourages whole-brain, iterative thinking in the most effective sequence; it is
cooperative in nature and is most productive when done as a team effort.

The process and mindsets
Problem definition: Detective and
Explorer
Idea generation (many ideas): Artist
Idea synthesis (better ideas): Engineer
Idea evaluation (best idea): Judge
Solution implementation: Producer
Fig. 1 is a graphic which illustrates
the cyclic, iterative nature of the creative
problem solving process and associated
mindsets. Each mindset incorporates
distinct thinking skills defined by the
four-quadrant brain model of thinking
modes or “ways of knowing” developed
by Ned Herrmann, the father of brain
dominance technology.
Ned Herrmann worked for many
years at General Electric, first as a
physicist, then in the area of human
resource development. He became very
interested in the relationship of creativity to the brain and over two decades
developed and validated a model of
brain dominance. Although based on
the physical brain, it is now a very useful metaphorical model that can give
insight into how different people think
and communicate.
Each person’s thinking profile is
developed from responses to a 120question survey form, the Herrmann
Brain Dominance Instrument (HBDI)
which was developed by Ned Herrmann. The resulting profile denotes a

coalition of four distinct modes of thinking and processing information. Fig. 2 is
a schematic of the Herrmann model of
thinking preferences.
In the Herrmann model, the four
quadrants of the brain are labeled A, B,
C, D, counterclockwise beginning with
the left cerebral quadrant. The thinking
modes clustered within each quadrant
have similarities; the modes in different
quadrants identify distinctly different
characteristics or ways of thinking.
Each mode has value and is suited for
particular tasks.
Quiidrant A (the upper left cerebral
quadrant) is andyticd, rational, mathematical, judgmental thinking concerned
with hardware, data analysis, financial
budgets, and calculations.
Quadmrzt B (the lower limbic left
quadrant) is sequential, controlled, routine, persistent thinking concerned with
administration, safekeeping, maintaining the status quo, detail, tactical planning, and organization.
Quudrarzf C (the lower limbic right
quadrant) i s interpersonal, empathetic, peopleintuitive,
symbolic,
value-based thinking
concerned with communications, body sencations, music, nurturing,
teaching, and training.
Quadrant D (the
upper right cerebral
quadrant) is imaginative,
spacial, metaphorical,
flexible, idea-intuitive,
playful, creative thinking
concerned with possibilities, dreams, visions, synthesis, strategic planning,
change, innovation, and
entrepreneurship.
Each quadrant has its
own vocabulary and way

Edward Lumsdaine and Monika Lumsdaine

+*.

*i

of solving problems. Often, people with
similar thinking preferences form tribes
that tend to exclude those who are “different.” Our thinking preferences determine how well we communicate with
others; when we understand the fourquadrant model and work in whole-brain
teams, we learn to understand people
who have thinking preferences that differ from our own.
Ned Herrmann, from his extensive
work with industry, found that the
thinking profile needed to succeed in
the 1960s was a profile that had its
strongest preference in short-range,
conventional wisdom thinking (quadrant B). The 1970s called for dominance in quadrant A thinking, since the
focus was on technical and financial
concerns. The profile for the 1980s
was more whole-brained, with almost
equal preferences in quadrants A, B,
and C , and a slightly stronger tilt
toward quadrant D, since strategic
thinking and hi-tech development was
needed. For the 1990s and beyond,

Fig, 1. Mindsets and thinking modes used in
creative problem solving.

DECEMBER ‘SWJANUARY ’95
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on October 20, 2008 at 15:41 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5

-

appropriate problem solving
approach for a particular
problem
since they have a
Visual
broader arsenal of thinking
Holistic
strategies available to them.
Intuitive
Creative problem solving
Innovative
imaginative
begins by asking: What is the
r e d problem? We can picture
a
detective looking for clues
Interpersonal
and asking many questions to
Kinesthetic
Emotional
identify the causes of a probSpiritual
lem. Engineers use analytical
Sensory
techniques such as KepnerTregoe, SPC, customer surveys, experiments, FMEA,
Limbic
ITA, and QFD to collect data
0 1986 Ned Herrmann Reprintedwith permission 01 the author
to define the problem. For
complete problem definition,
Fig. 2. The Herrmann 4-quadrant model of
we must then use the explorbruin dominance.
er’s mindset: we must look
for trends and the broader context of the
quadrant D (as well as quadrant C)
problem. This requires right-brain thinkpreferences have strengthened considing modes and involves looking to other
erably with the new emphasis on globdisciplines, not just in one’s field of
al, long-range thinking. These profiles
expertise. The problem is then defined in
are shown in Fig. 3.
terms of a positive goal to prepare the
mind for the next step: brainstorming.
The process
Idea generation is represented by the
We can use the HBDI to identify the
artist’s mindset. The team is prepared
thinking profiles of individuals. This
for generating wild and crazy ideas with
allows us to form homogeneous and
a creative thinking warm-up (if possiheterogeneous teams. The whole-brain
ble) and then employs a brainstorming
team usually comes up with a more
technique appropriate to the size and
complete solution to an assignment; the
composition of the team, the time conmembers are able to identify the most
Cerebral

straints, the environment, and the problem being solved. A key rule to follow
is to defer judgment; quantity counts,
and “idea pinching” is allowed. All
ideas that are generated are collected for
further processing.
We have identified the next stage in
creative problem solving with the engineer’s mindset, because here we “engineer” ideas to make them better and
more practical. Negative judgment continues to be deferred, but now we look
for quality, and we use wild ideas as
stepping stones to generate additional
creative as well as practical ideas. Ideas
are written on notecards and then sorted
into categories. Categories are assigned
to different teams-within each category, ideas are synthesized down to fewer,
but better ideas. Finally, the teams try to
forcefit or synthesize ideas between different categories.
The engineered ideas are now ready
to be evaluated by the judge. Analytical
and critical thinking skills are used to
identify shortcomings. However, when
flaws are found, the ideas are not discarded; instead, another round of creative
thinking seeks to overcome the negative
aspects of the ideas. The team employs
the Pugh method of creative concept
evaluation, an iterative matrix technique
which leads the teams to develop a superior, compound solution based on brainstormed criteria derived from
customer needs and team consensus.
As a final step, the judging team
then makes the decision to implement the optimal solution.
Solution implementation is a
new problem that requires creative
problem solving. We use the
metaphor of the producer for this
step. Structured thinking for planning the implementation and interpersonal thinking for working with
people to accept change are now
required. However, the producer
team must repeat the entire creative
problem solving process to obtain
optimum results. Here again, established techniques for making work
plans, monitoring plans, budgets,
time schedules, risk analysis, and
project evaluations can be
employed, depending on the complexity of the implementation.

--lD

Table 1
Two ways of teaching heat transfer

Analytical approach

’ 1
~

Students must know the fundamentals.
Minimal computer use.
Artificial, neat problems.
Problems are fully defined.
Students spend much time substituting
in equations (plug-and-chug).
Only one “correct” solution expected.
Right-or-wronganswers.
Narrow focus on course or discipline.
Pure analysis-no design content.
Students work alone.
Learning is teacher-centered.
Students fear risk; failure is punished.
Learning from failure does not occur.
Quick idea judgment.
Isolated, disconnected learning; no
communications skills are taught.
Left-brain thinking only; the creative

Contextual approach
Students must know the fundamentals.
Extensive computer use.
Real-life, “messy” problems.
Problems are open-ended.
Students spend much time in critical
thinking and in asking “what if” questions.
Multiple solutions/alternatives expected.
Contextual problem solving.
Multidisciplinary focus.
Application to design is central.
Students work alone and in teams.
Learning is student-centered.
Students examine causes of failure for
continuous improvement.
Deferred idea judgment.
Students are required to make a verbal
presentation and a written project report.
*The creative problem solving approach and

The course
We developed this method over
a number of years. Our work started when we were asked by indus-

IEEE POTENTIALS
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on October 20, 2008 at 15:41 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

-

try to write a manual and teach workshops to engineering teams on how to
think more creatively. It dawned on us
that we were doing “remedial” work
because something was missing in the
way engineers were educated. Thus we
developed a freshman course and textbook for engineering students.
Although creative problem solving
forms the central part of our threecredit hour course, we have introduced
related topics. We emphasize visualization and memory techniques to
practice right-brain modes of processing information. We have incorporated
a sketching lab as well as a computer
lab using MathematicaTM.We have a
unit on how to o v e r c o m e mental
blocks to creative thinking. And we
assess student thinking preferences
with the Herrmann Brain Dominance
Instrument (HBDI). The creative problem solving process is applied to a
class exercise problem-a design project. The students are required to do a
customer survey and Pareto analysis of
the collected data. They must also do a

I

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

B-dominant

A-dominant

Balanced

D-dominant

I

Profiles 01986 Ned Herrmann. Reprinted with permission

Fig. 3. Paradigm shin in thinking preferences needed for success.

literature search and a patent search.
Just-in-time teaching about environmental and social considerations is
provided depending on the particular
design project. Ethics is discussed as
related to the judge’s mindset. Each
team of five students is made up of different thinkers based on the results of
the HBDI. We have found that wholebrain teams usually c o m e up with
superior solutions once the members
learn how to work together. Communication skills are emphasized. Students

learn to communicate with people that
have different thinking preferences.
They have to write a creative “thinking” report and are required to give a
30-second individual “speech” on the
topic of their report.
For the midterm review, the students
have a choice of completing an individual essay on five creative questions or
doing a small team design project. The
final exam is a team presentation on the
results of the design project. Students
also have to do a careful class evalua-

What kind of thinkers does industry want
The founder of IBM, Thomas Watson, made the word
“think” his company’s slogan. The word was plastered everywhere and employees were expected to at least act like they
were thinking. And it apparently worked. IBM became a
leader in the computer-notwithstanding its recent slowdown-by thinking up ways to stay on top.
So how does industry want you to think? What types of
engineers are they recruiting? In 1992, Motorola listed these
items as highly desirable in a quality briefing:
Knowing how to learn,
Listening and speaking well,
Creative thinking and problem solving,
Interpersonal relations and teaming,
Self-esteem and motivation,
Organizational effectiveness and leadership.
In a speech (at the 1994 Regional Meeting of the American Society of Engineering Education), Dr. Arlington W.
Carter, Jr., Vice President of Continuous Quality Improvement at Boeing, mentioned that his company was looking for
engineers who can work in teams, who can think creatively,
who have a global view, who understand management and
leadership, and who have the ability to cope with change. Dr.
Mark A. Stumpf, Director of Corporate Plant Engineering
Operations for Abbott Laboratories, emphasized that his
company is looking for teamwork skills, leadership, creativity, and experience with diversity.
These companies take it for granted that graduates will
have good analytical problem solving skills and solid knowledge of engineering fundamentals. They are looking for “value
added.” In other words, engineers for the 2 1st century have to

be innovators capable of creating new products and new
processes that generate jobs.
Dr. William M. Spurgeon, who has years of experience as
vice president at Bendix, with NSF in Washington, and most
recently as Director of Manufacturing Systems Engineering
at the University of Michigan-Dearborn, reasons that innovation takes too long, costs too much, and often does not succeed in the marketplace because most universities are not
preparing engineers adequately. He has developed an interesting function tree (to borrow a term from value engineering) for different types of engineering graduates.
Level 1: Degreed engineers are either assistants who are
good at “plug and chug” problem solving or creators who
produce most of the worthwhile ideas.
Level 2: Creators are either problem solvers who must be
shown the significant problems or initiators who can find
and identify the worthwhile problems.
Level 3: The initiators are either the discoverers who try to
understand phenomena (the fundamental, curious researchers)
or the inventors and entrepreneurs who try to utilize phenomena to some advantage. It is these entrepreneurs who are job
generators.
One charge against our colleges of engineering is that
they turn out far too few creators-initiators-inventors: the
people who can operate the innovation process and thus generate jobs. Also, our graduates can no longer count on being
hired by a large corporation; many need to have the broad
skills useful to smaller companies or the skills required to
start their own companies and make them succeed. In addition to engineering knowledge, they need political, legal, and
financial know-how. -EL & M L

DECEMBER ‘9WJANUARY ‘95
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on October 20, 2008 at 15:41 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Glossary
Kepner-Tregoe is an analytical method which employs long lists of questions
to investigate a problem. The problem is defined as the extent of change from a
former satisfactory state to the present unsatisfactory state. Finding the causes of
the deviation should help solve the problem. This requires specific, quantitative
data about the entire problem area.
SPC or Statistical Process Control is a collection of seven tools that use
statistical data and comparisons to monitor processes. The goal is to keep variations and the resulting decrease in quality to a minimum. The tools of SPC are used
to make graphs of the data; when these results are analyzed, the causes of problems
can be identified. The seven tools are: checksheets, histograms, cause-and-effect
(fishbone)diagrams, Pareto diagrams, scatter diagrams, control charts, and whatever additional documentation is needed to prevent problems.
FMEA or Failure Mode and Effects Analysis is used, for example by the
Ford Motor Company, to explore all possible failure modes for a product or a
process. Engineers look at the probability of a failure as well as the effect of the
failure (and how easy or difficult it is to detect) in order to be able to prevent
defects and develop test programs.
FTA or Fault Tree Analysis focuses on identifying a system’s parts and
events that could lead to or have led to a single, particular failure. The method
graphically represents Boolean logic and directs problem-solving activities toward
eliminating the failure from occurring by controlling all factors that could possibly
contribute to the failure.

QFD or Quality Function Deployment is a very structured procedure
invented in Japan and in recent years adopted by many organizations in the U.S. It
employs benchmarking and the “voice of the customer” in a series of evaluation
matrices, with the purpose of improving the quality of components of a product (or
service) above the level of the best competing product, for those items most critical
to customer satisfaction.
The Pugh Method of Creative Design Concept Evaluation is a technique where a team employs creative thinking to overcome the negative features
and shortcomings of proposed designs. The ideas and concepts are placed together
on a matrix and evaluated against a list of criteria. Through repeated cycles of discussion and comparing the improving designs against the top concept of the preceding round, the team converges on an optimum, synthesized design concept (or
idea), where all flaws have been eliminated. True consensus and understanding
develops on why this synthesized concept is best and the team members want to
see it succeed.
Pareto Analysis employs a specialized bar graph to identify and separate the
vital, most important causes of trouble from the more trivial items. Its first use was
in economics. It is based on the 20180 principle: by concentrating resources on the
top 20 percent of the causes, 80 percent of the problems can be cured. It is useful
for assigning priorities for continuous improvement efforts

tion. Imagine students choosing the final
exam as the best part of the course-this
is what has happened! Or students saying that they would have liked to have
had more homework. The grading philosophy is “zero defect” or “hitting the
target.” Since there are alternate ways of
achieving the goal, the focus is no
longer on grades (and the resultant
stress) but on individual and group
excellence and learning. Students thrive
on the interactive, hands-on, team-centered environment of this course.

From faculty’s viewpoint
As engineering faculty, we can use
the creative problem solving process
together with the Pugh method to
change the courses we teach so they
fall more in line with industry requirements. The resulting contextual problem solving goes beyond engineering
analysis and considers such aspects as
the people/society interface, the environment, v a l u e d e t h i c s , long-term
effects, resource management, and
costs (production costs as well as the

cost to society of poor quality). Table 1
shows a comparison of analytical and
contextual problem solving for a heat
transfer course. This course was taught
to juniors in electrical engineering.
The results have been surprising: the
students learn much more; they can
apply their skills in many new situations.
They learn flexibility, leadership, and
critical thinking. Even though the exams
are longer and much more difficult, the
class grade is now B-centered. In the
past, as much as a third of the class
dropped out or failed (and student performance centered on a grade of C t n o w
only a rare student drops out, and none
have failed so far. Students have selected
some very interesting design projects.
Two students even received job offers
because of their contact with industry as
part of their project investigation.
How was it possible to incorporate
these new activities into a course that
already had a very tight syllabus? This
is a legitimate question-we all know
that the engineering curriculum is
already overburdened. One thing is certain-without
making some radical
changes, we cannot add new materials,
no matter how desirable they might be.
First of all, making extensive use of
computers for problem solving and
optimization (and report writing) saves
time, and students are able to do more
realistic, more complicated problems.
But computers alone do not solve the
problem: we had to sit down and actually look at each item we were teaching
to decide its relevance. Is this topic useful? Is it teachable? Is it a duplicationis it covered in a preceding course, or
will it be covered in a follow-on
course? Does it fit into the context?
Does it meet a need-in industry, in
subsequent courses, in design? Is it
integrated with other courses? We used
the Fugh method for this evaluation. As
a result, we were able to eliminate elegant topics dear to our hearts that took
weeks to teach, yet were of no practical
use to students today.

like teacher, like student
Thinking preferences are strong filters in the learning process, especially if
the instructor’s preferences are “foreign” to the student’s preferred way of
thinking. Engineering faculty on the
average have a distinct profile, with a
strong preference in analytical thinking,
lesser preferences in quadrant B and

IEEE POTENTIALS

8
-

Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on October 20, 2008 at 15:41 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

quadrant D thinking, and least preference in quadrant C thinking-their profile strongly resembles the 1970s profile
identified by Ned Herrmann.
From 1990 to 1994, we collected
HBDI data for freshmen and senior
engineering students at the University
of Toledo. We have found that the average profile for seniors closely resembles
that of the faculty, except that students
have somewhat higher scores in quadrant B, the “plug and chug” mode of
thinking. Are we educating excellent
engineers for the 1970s?
Our longitudinal research project
with the HBDI shows that many students become more left-brain dominant
as they go through the engineering curriculum, since the curriculum itself is
extremely skewed toward quadrant A
thinking. Students who have the rightbrain-dominant “ 1990s profile” have
had retention rates at least three to four
times worse than the more traditional
students. We have been losing the talented, creative students needed by industry!
When we analyzed the profiles of
1994 seniors who had taken the HBDI
survey as freshmen, we discovered that
6 0 percent of these students have
become more left-brained, with some
making a complete switch from right to
left. We found that 20 percent of the students developed their own ways of practicing right-brain thinking (such as
seeking out group activities); these students remained “different” despite the
curriculum pressures. The creative problem solving course gave them the affirmation that it was okay to be different.
Another twenty percent of the students made a noticeable shift to rightbrain or whole-brain thinking-these
were students who without exception
received additional practice in creativity by being assistants in creative probl e m solving c l a s s e s o r helping in
Saturday Academy. These students
were the only group who increased in
preference for quadrant C thinking.
We note with grave concern this
considerable drop in quadrant C thinking by the left-brain students, even as
industry demands engineers with interpersonal and leadership skills. Low
quadrant C thinking also creates a
classroom climate that is uncomfortable for some students. The only difference we have found between the
average thinking preference profile for
men and women students is in quadrant C. Here women, on the average,

have a noticeably stronger preference.
Based on early data from University of
Toledo students, quadrant C thinking is
a mode that many male students tend
to avoid, particularly in computer science and mechanical engineering.

Conclusion
and implications
We believe our results confirm that
quadrant C and D activities must be part
of the engineering curriculum so individuals can develop their potential in all
four thinking quadrants. This also will
reduce the probability that those with
right-brain thinking preferences opt out
of engineering. Creative problem solving can be used to strengthen the productivity, quality of teamwork, thinking
and communication skills of students
and faculty in all four quadrants.
Traditionally, engineering faculty
expected their students to have thinking
preferences much like their own. All
others would be “weeded out” during
the freshman or sophomore year, since
creative thinking is often covertly or
actively discouraged.
Today, we are seeing incoming
freshmen classes with roughly forty
percent of the students right-brain dominant. Society cannot afford to lose the
valuable thinking preferences of these
individuals- because these are our
future innovators and entrepreneurs.
Change is not easy; it requires
patience, effort, and persistence. Whether
you are still a student or already out in
industry, seek out any and all opportunities for learning and practicing new
thinking skills and teamwork. Thinking
in a quadrant that is not a preferred mode
requires more energy initially; thus we
tend to avoid those modes. However, we
can develop preferences if we make the
effort, because the brain is “plastic” and
undergoes changes in structure each time
it is used. You can prepare yourself to
take advantage of the opportunities
ahead in the 2 1st century.

Read more about it
Edward Lumsdaine and Monika
Lumsdaine, “Full Implementation of a
Freshman Course in Creativity and
Problem Solving,” Proceedings, ASEE
Annual Corference, New Orleans, June
1991, Vol. 2, pp. 1 572-1 577.
Edward Lumsdaine and Monika
Lumsdaine, Creative Problem Solving:
Thinking Skills f o r a Changing World,

McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995 (available now). The third edition should be
available by mid-1994.
Ned Herrmann, The Creative
Brain, Brain Books, Lake Lure, North
Carolina, 1990.
Edward Lumsdaine and Jennifer
Voitle, “Contextual Problem Solving
in Heat Transfer and Fluid Mechanics,” AlChE Symposium Series, Heat
Transfer-Atlanta 1993, Volume 89,
pp. 540-548.
Edward Lumsdaine and Jennifer
Voitle, “Introducing Creativity and
Design into Traditional Engineering
Analysis Courses,” Proceedings, ASEE
Annuul Conference, Urbana, Illinois,
June 1993, pp. 843-847.
Monika Lumsdaine and Edward
Lumsdaine, “Thinking Preferences of
Engineering Students: Implications for
Cumculum Restructuring,” accepted for
publication to the Journal of Etzgineering Education, in 1995.

About the authors
Dr. Edward Lumsdaine was a
research engineer at Boeing, taught at
South Dakota State University and the
University of Tennessee, directed the
New Mexico Solar Energy Institute and
became Dean of Engineering at the
University of Michigan-Dearborn, the
University of Toledo, and most recently
at Michigan Technological University.
His research in heat transfer, fluid
mechanics, aeroacoustics, solar energy.
product quality, and innovative teaching is published in over 100 papers. He
frequently conducts math review courses in industry with software he and his
colleagues have developed. He
received the 1994 Chester S. Carlson
Award from the American Society for
Engineering Education for designing
and implementing significant innovation in a changing sociological and
technological environment.
Monika Lumsdaine is a technical
writer and award-winning passive solar
home designer with a degree in math.
She and her husband have developed
and team-teach creative problem solving
courses and workshops to engineering
students and faculty, people in industry,
as well as teachers, students, and parents. She is president of her own consulting firm, holds an appointment as
visiting scholar at Michigan Tech, and is
certified in the administration of the
Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument.

DECEMBER ’94/JANUARY ‘95
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on October 20, 2008 at 15:41 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9

