Bilingualism: Language and Cognition
http://journals.cambridge.org/BIL
Additional services for Bilingualism: Language and Cognition:
Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here

Is multilingualism linked to a higher tolerance of ambiguity?
JEAN­MARC DEWAELE and LI WEI
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition / Volume 16 / Issue 01 / January 2013, pp 231 ­ 240
DOI: 10.1017/S1366728912000570, Published online: 09 October 2012

Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S1366728912000570
How to cite this article:
JEAN­MARC DEWAELE and LI WEI (2013). Is multilingualism linked to a higher tolerance of ambiguity?. Bilingualism: 
Language and Cognition, 16, pp 231­240 doi:10.1017/S1366728912000570
Request Permissions : Click here

Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/BIL, IP address: 128.232.233.62 on 27 Feb 2013

C Cambridge University Press 2012 doi:10.1017/S1366728912000570
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 16 (1), 2013, 231–240 

Is multilingualism linked to a
higher tolerance of
ambiguity?∗

J E A N - M A R C D E WA E L E
LI WEI
Birkbeck College, University of London

(Received: January 17, 2012; final revision received: August 3, 2012; accepted: August 4, 2012; first published online 9 October 2012)

The present study investigates the link between multilingualism and the personality trait Tolerance of Ambiguity (TA) among
2158 mono-, bi- and multilinguals. Monolinguals and bilinguals scored significantly lower on TA compared to multilinguals.
A high level of global proficiency of various languages was linked to higher TA scores. A stay abroad of more than three
months was also linked to higher TA although the effect levelled off after one year. Growing up in a multilingual family had
no effect on TA. These findings show that a high level of multilingualism makes individuals more at ease in dealing with
ambiguity, but we acknowledge that a higher level of TA can also strengthen an individual’s inclination to become
multilingual.
Keywords: multilingualism, personality, Tolerance of Ambiguity, multicompetence, individual variation

Introduction
Psychologists agree that personality is shaped by a
combination of physiological and enduring social factors
(McCrae, Costa, Ostendorf, Angleitner, Hrebícková, Avia,
Sanz, Sánchez-Bernardos, Kusdil, Woodfield, Saunders &
Smith, 2000). However, relatively little research has been
carried out on the effect of social, cultural and linguistic
factors on personality traits at an individual level (Pervin
& Cervone, 2010). As researchers in multilingualism
we are keen to find out whether bilinguals’ personality
profiles might differ from the personality profiles of
monolinguals, and whether the difference might extend
to multilinguals.
We argue that a high level of multilingualism
and multiculturalism represents the kind of enduring
sociocultural influence that can shape personality. More
specifically, we investigate whether multilingualism and
the experience of having to function in a foreign language
and culture for a certain length of time makes people more
tolerant of ambiguity. Case studies and small-scale studies
suggest that this might be the case (Bakalis & Joiner,
2004; Kinginger, 2008). Individuals who are tolerant of
ambiguity are more likely to perceive ambiguity positively
(Budner, 1962).
By focusing on the possible link between
multilingualism and Tolerance of Ambiguity (TA) using
a very large sample of participants (N = 2158), we
* A previous version of this paper was presented at the Eighth
International Symposium on Bilingualism in Oslo in 2011. We would
like to thank the participants and the anonymous reviewers for their
excellent feedback on an earlier version of this paper. Thank you also
to Ruxandra Comanaru for her statistical advice.

hope to shed light on the psychological effects of
multilingualism/multiculturalism. We see our study as an
important complement to the rich ongoing research on the
cognitive consequences of bi- and multilingualism (see
Bialystok, Craik & Luk, 2012).
In the following section we will look at the research on
psychological aspects of multilingualism. We will then
present our research instrument, the adapted Tolerance
for Ambiguity Scale (Herman, Stevens, Bird, Mendenhall
& Oddou, 2010), the design of our empirical study, our
research questions and hypotheses. Subsequently, we will
test four hypotheses using the data, collected through
an online questionnaire. The findings will be discussed
in the subsequent section. Finally, we will draw some
conclusions and consider the implications of our findings
for multilingualism research.
Literature review
We define multilinguals as people with at least partial
mastery in a number of languages. In this we follow the
recent trend in research to use the terms multilingualism
and multilingual “in a broad, inclusive sense, in such
a way that they include the concepts of bilingualism
and bilingual within their respective ambits” (Aronin &
Singleton, 2012, p. 7). We will therefore use the terms
“monolingual”, “bilingual”, “trilingual”, “quadrilingual”,
“pentalingual” and “sextalingual”, which offers us a
more specific categorisation of multilinguals to compare
with monolinguals. We will also point out that all these
terms can cover very different linguistic profiles, and we
will present a more precise measure of multilingualism
and multiculturalism, namely global language proficiency

Address for correspondence:
Jean-Marc Dewaele, Department of Applied Linguistics & Communication, Birkbeck College, 30, Russell Square, London WC1B 5DT, UK
j.dewaele@bbk.ac.uk

232

Jean-Marc Dewaele and Li Wei

(representing the sum of oral and written knowledge in
various languages).
Research on the effect of multilingualism on
personality
The abundance of research on cognitive effects of biand multilingualism stands in contrast with the more
limited interest in its potential psychological effects
(Dewaele & van Oudenhoven, 2009). Some research has
been carried out showing that participants knowing more
languages typically report lower levels of communicative
anxiety in their various languages, including their L1
(Dewaele, 2010a, b; Dewaele, Petrides & Furnham, 2008).
The knowledge of more languages, and the advanced
knowledge of multiple languages have also been linked
to higher levels of Openmindedness – which has much in
common with TA (Furnham, 1994) – (Dewaele & Stavans,
in press; Dewaele & van Oudenhoven, 2009, Korzilius,
Van Hooft, Planken & Hendrix, 2011). People knowing
more languages have been found to have higher levels
of Cognitive Empathy (Dewaele & Li Wei, in press).
These studies suggest that multilingualism is an enduring
factor that can have a small but significant effect on some
personality traits.
Research on Tolerance of Ambiguity
Furnham (1994) points out that TA has been used in
various branches of psychology where it was conceived
as a property of cultures, organisations and individuals.
Budner (1962) defined TA as the “tendency to perceive
ambiguous situations as desirable” (p. 29). He argues that
an ambiguous situation or stimulus may be defined as
“one which cannot be adequately structured or categorised
by the individual because of the lack of sufficient cues”
(p. 30) and is characterised by one of the following three
attributions: novelty, i.e. “a completely new situation in
which there are no familiar cues” (p. 30); complexity,
i.e. “a complex situation in which there are a great
number of cues to be taken into account” (p. 30);
and insolubility, i.e. “a contradictory situation in which
different elements or cues suggest different structures”
(p. 30).
Budner’s measure remains popular in management and
organisational psychology (McLain, 1993). Psychologists
have focused on various aspects of TA while maintaining
Budner’s original idea. McLain (1993), for example,
defines TA as “a range, from rejection to attraction, of
reactions to stimuli perceived as unfamiliar, complex,
dynamically uncertain, or subject to multiple conflicting
interpretations” (p. 184).
According to Furnham and Ribchester (1995) TA
“refers to the way an individual (or group) perceives
and processes information about ambiguous situations
when confronted by an array of unfamiliar, complex or

incongruent cues . . . The person with low tolerance
of ambiguity experiences stress, reacts prematurely,
and avoids ambiguous stimuli. At the other extreme
of the scale, however, a person with high tolerance
of ambiguity perceives ambiguous situations/stimuli
as desirable, challenging, and interesting and neither
denies nor distorts their complexity of incongruity”
(p. 179). TA is negatively correlated with measures
of rigidity, authoritarianism, machiavellianism and
dogmatism (Furnham & Ribchester, 1995).
Researchers have investigated the relationship between
TA and a range of variables. We will focus on a small
number of studies that are relevant to our research
questions. Seravalle (2011) looked at foreign accents from
a listener’s perspective and linked perceptions of foreign
accents to TA scores. Her argument is that “foreign accent,
from a listener’s point of view, is in essence ambiguous”
(pp. 227–228). She hypothesised that a foreign accent
could trigger discomfort and closure among individuals
with low levels of TA, while individuals with higher levels
of TA would display more flexibility and adaptability,
leading on average to more successful performance (p.
228). These hypotheses were confirmed in a study with
150 listener-judges who were students at the University
of London. The lower the level of TA, the harsher the
judgements across all categories (p. 231).
In the same vein, Reiterer, Singh and Winkler (to
appear) reported that high ability imitators scored higher
on articulatory flexibility, possibly because they “must still
possess this openness to build new phonetic categories
on an ad-hoc basis, and not rely on pre-experienced,
entrenched categories” (p. 16). The similarity with our
definition of TA is striking, namely the capacity to
perceive and process information that deviates from the
usual patterns.
Tolerance of Ambiguity has also been identified as a
possible characteristic of the “good language learner” in
Second Language Acquisition (SLA) research because
such a learner is “comfortable with uncertainty . . . and
willing to try out his guesses” (Rubin, 1975, p. 45). Rubin
(2008) argued that the language learning process itself
could make learners more comfortable with uncertainty
once they realise “that change is an integral part of
the language learning process” (p. 11). Chapelle and
Robert (1986) found that TA was a significant predictor
of L2 proficiency. The authors point out that ambiguity
is inherent to any L2 situation, but that it is lower in the
L2 classroom where the teacher can lift the ambiguity
on specific linguistic aspects compared to an immersion
situation where learners have “to attend to all language
cues simultaneously” (p. 31).
Oxford and Ehrman (1992) reported that TA is a strong
predictor of L2 learners’ learning strategies, especially
“orientation to closure” which reflects the learner’s
inclination to reach a decision (p. 197).

Multilingualism and tolerance of ambiguity
Ely (1995) pointed out that a learner listening to an L2
perceives ambiguous input because of lack of familiarity
with accent, pronunciation, unknown words or grammar.
The ideal learner “is neither inhibited by low tolerance
of ambiguity nor oblivious to linguistic subtleties. The
student who is aware of, but not threatened by, linguistic
differentiation, and who treats it as an occasion for
introspection, experimentation and, ultimately, learning,
is the one for whom tolerance of ambiguity will be a help,
not a hindrance” (p. 93). This was confirmed in BaranLucarz’s (2012) study on types of ego boundaries and
accuracy in English L2 pronunciation. She found a weak
positive correlation between pronunciation scores and a
boundary representing “the subjects’ attitudes towards
accepting objects, concepts and situations that lack clear
borders” (p. 60).
A moderate level of TA thus seems optimal in SLA:
learners with very low levels of TA might lack the
willingness to take intelligent risks with the new language
while learners with very high levels of TA might show an
unquestioning acceptance and cognitive passivity (Oxford
& Ehrman, 1992, p. 195). Teachers can help a student
reach this optimal level of TA in the L2 class, where the
student is no longer “embarrassed or unhappy at linguistic
uncertainty”, but sees “himself or herself as a linguistic
researcher or problem solver” (Ely, 1995, p. 92).
Some researchers involved in study abroad studies have
also considered a different perspective, namely the effect
of the study abroad on various aspects of personality,
including TA. Findings suggest that the combination
of learning a foreign language while staying in a new
cultural environment boosts learners’ appreciation of
diversity, cross-cultural interest, cultural cosmopolitanism
and makes them more critical of their own culture (Carlson
& Widaman, 1988). It is thus not surprising that Nishida
(1985) found that Japanese students with a high level of
TA reacted better to an expatriate experience and reported
less culture shock. Similar patterns emerged from the
study by Bakalis and Joiner (2004), which compared a
small group of Australian students who had studied abroad
with a similar group who had continued their studies in
the home institution. A cross tabulation analysis showed
that the study abroad group scored significantly higher
on Openness and TA. Qualitative analysis showed that
high Openness/high TA students were more likely to view
study abroad as exciting, as an opportunity to make new
friends and as a means to enhance their careers.
Research questions and hypotheses
The present study will address the following four
questions:
1. Is the knowledge of more languages linked to higher
levels of TA? We expect participants knowing more
languages to score higher on TA.

233

2. Is advanced global proficiency of multiple languages
linked to higher levels of TA? We expect that this
is the case. We consider global proficiency as a
corroborative but non-orthogonal measure to the
number of languages known by participants.
3. Does growing up bilingually affect TA? We
hypothesise that participants who grew up bi- or
trilingually will score higher on TA.
4. Does living abroad affect TA? If that is the case, do
those who have stayed abroad longer score higher on
TA? Our expectation is that participants who have
lived outside their homeland for more than three
months will score higher on TA, and that those who
have stayed abroad for more than a year will score
higher than those whose stays did not exceed one
year.
We choose three months because it corresponds with
the minimal length of an internship in the Erasmus
Programme, where European students spend up to a year
of study in another European country. It is therefore a
common lower limit for studies on effects of study abroad.
Method
Participants
A total of 2158 multilinguals (1589 females, 457 males,
112 participants did not provide this information) filled
out the sociobiographical questionnaire (see Appendix A)
and the research instrument (see Appendix B). The mean
age was 34.5 years (SD = 12.1). Participants are generally
highly educated with 31 having a high school diploma,
606 a Bachelor’s degree, 712 a Master’s degree, and
613 a Doctoral degree. This majority of highly educated,
mostly female polyglots is typical for online language
questionnaires (Wilson & Dewaele, 2010).
The participants reported 204 different nationalities,
including many participants with double nationalities. The
largest group came from the USA (n = 478), followed by
British (n = 299); Dutch (n = 145); Belgian (n = 81),
German (n = 81), Canadian (n = 76), Polish (n = 65),
French (n = 58), Spanish (n = 42), Chinese (n = 41)
and many language groups with smaller numbers. English
was the most frequent L1 (n = 866), followed by Dutch
(n = 195), French (n = 155), Spanish (n = 138), German
(n = 124), Polish (n = 71), Chinese (n = 63), etc. The most
frequent L2 was English (n = 924), followed by French
(n = 455), Spanish (n = 248), German (n = 143), etc.
The pattern was different for the L3 with French coming
first (n = 424), followed by German (n = 330), English
(n = 248) and Spanish (n = 222). The most frequent L4s
were German (n = 205), Spanish (n = 196), French (n =
174) and English (n = 44). The most frequent L5s were

234

Jean-Marc Dewaele and Li Wei

Spanish (n = 101), Italian (n = 69) and French (n = 50).
We also asked whether participants had lived abroad for
longer than three months. Those who answered positively
(n = 1421) were asked how long they had lived abroad. Of
these participants, about a quarter reported having lived
abroad for up to one year, the second quarter had lived
abroad between two and four years, the third quarter had
lived abroad between five and 10 years and the final quarter
had lived abroad for more than 10 years.
Self-perceived oral and written proficiency in the
various languages was measured through a five-point
Likert scale (ranging from minimal to maximal fluency).
Languages acquired early in life were typically mastered
to a higher level compared to those acquired later.
The sample consists of 41 monolinguals, 399
bilinguals, 566 trilinguals, 557 quadrilinguals, 359
pentalinguals, 143 sextalinguals, 54 septalinguals, 21
octalinguals, 9 participants reported knowing 9 languages,
5 participants knew 10 languages, and 1 participant knew
12 languages. A single category was created including all
participants with six or more languages. A majority (n =
1718) reported having a single L1, a minority reported
growing up with two L1s (n = 422) and 18 participants
grew up with three languages from birth (the latter two
groups were aggregated).
Participants’ information on self-perceived proficiency
in these languages was used to develop a global measure
of multilingualism, first presented in Dewaele and Stavans
(in press). In order to distinguish multilinguals with
limited knowledge of various languages from those with
advanced knowledge of several languages, we calculated
a measure of global proficiency, namely the sum of scores
on oral and written proficiency for up to six languages
(including two L1s) (maximal possible score 10 × 6 =
60). The global proficiency score is thus a more finegrained measure of actual self-rated ability in oral and
written skills in various languages than the mere number
of languages acquired (and/or mostly forgotten) by the
individual. Global proficiency scores vary between 5
and 55 with a mean of 25.5 (SD = 8.0). Participants
were divided into three groups (low, medium, high).
Participants with scores that were more than 1 standard
deviation below the mean were categorised as “Low
Proficiency” (n = 244), those with scores that were more
than 1 standard deviation above the mean were categorised
as “High Proficiency” (n = 278), while the remaining
participants were categorised as “Medium Proficiency”
(n = 1510). The creation of three groups allows us to
focus on the groups of participants at either end of the
continuum (see Dewaele et al., 2008, where this method
was used).
We are aware that our participants do not reflect the
“general population” because of the high proportion of
women and highly educated participants. We would like to
argue that this is in fact a strength since participation in this

type of questionnaire requires high levels of metalinguistic
and metacognitive awareness, and a genuine willingness
to complete the questionnaire accurately and completely
(Wilson & Dewaele, 2010). The size of the sample
ensures a good level of ecological validity. With twothirds of our participants aged between 22 and 46 years,
we managed to target experienced foreign language users
rather than foreign language learners in schools and
universities.
Instrument
Herman et al. (2010) report that “measurement
challenges” are often cited to explain conflicting findings
regarding TA (p. 59). This motivated the authors to
develop a psychometrically sound measure of TA,
contextualised to cross-cultural contexts (p. 60). They
present the Tolerance for Ambiguity Scale (TAS),
which they describe as a “conceptually clear, internally
consistent assessment tool” (p. 60). It is a 12–item
questionnaire with five-point Likert scales. The authors
used a Principal Components analysis and found four
distinct dimensions which were labelled as follows:
(i) valuing diverse others; (ii) change; (iii) challenging
perspectives; and (iv) unfamiliarity (p. 62). Internal
consistency of the four dimensions was not sufficiently
robust to allow separate use, but the Cronbach alpha
measure for the overall measure was acceptable at .73
(p. 61). The authors therefore describe their measure of
TA “as a unitary but multifaceted construct” (p. 61).
We pilot-tested the TAS with 30 multilinguals. A
subsequent Cronbach alpha analysis of the TAS scale
revealed that one item dragged the overall alpha value
down to below .60. When removed, the alpha Cronbach
for the pilot test was .68. The item was removed from
the final version of the questionnaire. After feedback
from our participants, we also made some minor stylistic
adaptations.
The 11 items of the TAS had to be rated on a
five-point Likert scale anchored with 1 = “Strongly
Disagree” to 5 = “Strongly Agree” (see Appendix B).
The questionnaire was anonymous. The research design
and questionnaires received ethical clearance from the
appropriate committee at Birkbeck. The questionnaire
was an open-access survey available for four months
on Surveymonkey. It was advertised through several
listservs, targeted emails to multilingual colleagues and
their students in academic institutions, and informal
contacts around the world. It remained online between
December 2010 and March 2011. Because participants
left occasional questions blank, totals for specific variables
can vary. A Cronbach alpha analysis revealed modest but
sufficient internal consistency reliability for the 11 items
in the TAS: .64. A one-sample Kolmogorov Smirnov test
showed that the TA values for 1990 participants who

Multilingualism and tolerance of ambiguity

235

completed all items linked to TA are normally distributed.
TA scores range between 4 and 44. Mean score for TA is
28.9, SD = 5.6.
Tolerance of Ambiguity scores were found to be
positively correlated with Extraversion (r(1895) = .236,
p < .0001) and negatively correlated with Neuroticism
(r(1894) = –.127, p < .0001) (Eysenck, Eysenck &
Barrett, 1985). TA was also positively correlated with
Cognitive Empathy (r(1898) = .088, p < .0001) (Dewaele
& Li Wei, in press). We will not discuss these relationships
further as this falls outside the scope of the present
research note.
A Pearson correlation analysis revealed a strong
positive relationship between participants’ age and their
TA scores (r(1956) = .084, p < .0001). A similar
relationship was found between multilinguals’ age and
scores on Trait Emotional Intelligence (Dewaele et al.,
2008). It seems that with age, we become more tolerant
of ambiguity and more aware of our interlocutors’ states
of mind. The positive correlation between age and TA has
not been reported in the psychological literature to our
knowledge. However, we feel that a discussion of possible
causes falls outside the scope of the present paper. As
a consequence, we consider age as a covariate in the
present study, and we will opt for one-way ANCOVAs
instead of one-way ANOVAs in order to remove the
variance due to the association between age and TA. The
assumptions for ANCOVA were checked for each of the
variables. Bonferroni tests were applied for ANCOVA
post-hoc comparisons. All alpha levels were set at .05
and preliminary analysis showed that no corrections were
required.
An ANCOVA with age as a covariate and gender as
main effect showed a complete absence of effect on TA
(F(2,1980) = 1.44, p = ns). A second ANCOVA also
showed that the level of education has no significant effect
on TA: F(3,1985) = 0.85, p = ns).

via Internet cannot apply “a systematic, purposive
sampling strategy, as all participants are self-selected”
(p. 122). Indeed, once snowball sampling is initiated
researchers wait until the numbers of participants filling
out the questionnaire level off. This type of convenience
sampling is also the most common strategy in penand-paper research (p. 121). Gosling, Srivastava, Pand
and John (2004) reported that web-based research
has more advantages than disadvantages in terms of
sampling. Their large-scale comparison of Internet and
traditional samples in personality research revealed that
Internet samples may not be representative of the
population as a whole, but that they are more diverse
in terms of gender, age, race, socio-economic status and
geographical location than the traditional samples, which
are typically undergraduates. Gosling et al. (2004) also
found no significant differences in scores of personality
dimensions between the two groups, nor in patterns of
socialising. Denissen, Neumann and van Zalk (2010) have
reported that the psychometric properties of questionnaire
measures are comparable in paper-and-pen and online
versions. Wilson and Dewaele (2010) have argued that
random sampling in multilingualism research is “of
less importance as participants must of necessity be a
selected group of learners or users of a second language”
(p. 108).
Another issue in Internet-based research is that of
reliability. Indeed, there is no way of checking whether
responses are truthful. Wilson and Dewaele (2010) argued
that “it is hard to see the attraction of falsifying answers
to an online language history questionnaire” (p. 108).
Gosling et al. (2004) demonstrated that web-questionnaire
results generalise across presentation formats and are
consistent with results from pen-and-paper methods. After
the presentation of two case studies of web-based research,
Wilson and Dewaele (2010) concluded that the advantages
of web-based studies far outweigh the drawbacks.

The use of online questionnaires

Results

Dörnyei (2007) observes that the initial experiences with
online questionnaires “have been sufficiently positive
for this method to become established” (p. 121). The
main benefit is of an “economic” nature. The automatic
harvest of data into spreadsheets saves much time, limits
transcription errors and the anonymity of participants
enhances the level of honesty. Other benefits include
superior access: larger and more diverse samples can
be reached all over the world, and web-based research
also makes it possible to include “small, scattered,
or specialised populations which would otherwise be
difficult to reach” (p. 121). Dörnyei mentions two
potential problems with web-based research, namely
participant self-selection and increased heterogeneity
in the sample. Indeed, researchers who collect data

A one-way ANCOVA was conducted with the number of
languages known by participants as independent variable
and their level of TA as dependent variable, with age as a
covariate. This indicated a small but significant effect of
the number of languages: F(5,1984) = 8.7, p < .0001, η2
= .021. Age was a significant covariate (F(1,1980) = 14.6,
p < .0001, η2 = .007), older participants scoring higher
on TA. Participants knowing more languages scored
higher on TA compared to those with fewer languages. A
series of post-hoc pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni
corrections showed significant differences between the
monolinguals and all others groups (all p < .0001) with
a smaller difference between the monolinguals and the
bilinguals (p < .027). The bilinguals scored significantly
lower than all other multilingual groups (p < .05, all cases)

236

Jean-Marc Dewaele and Li Wei
Table 1. Linear stepwise regression analysis for
variables predicting Tolerance of Ambiguity.

Model
1
2

Independent
variables
Stay Abroad
Stay Abroad
Number of
Languages

B

Std E

Beta

t

p

0.628
0.546

0.114
0.116

0.122
0.106

5.49
4.72

.0001
.0001

0.416

0.098

0.096

4.27

.0001

Note: Model 1: r2 = .014, F(1,1988) = 30.13, p < .0001; Model 2: r2 = .024,
F(2,1987) = 18.21, p < .0001.

Figure 1. The effect of number of languages known on
Tolerance of Ambiguity (means and SDs).

(see Figure 1 for the adjusted means and SDs). Speakers
of three or more languages did not differ from one another.
We note too that knowledge of more than one language
decreased the dispersion of TA scores.
A one-way ANCOVA with age as a covariate showed
that global self-perceived proficiency had a small but
significant effect on TA (F(2,1978) = 6.0, p < .003, η2 =
.008). Age was a significant covariate (F(1,1978) = 15.1,
p < .0001, η2 = .008). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons,
with Bonferroni correction, showed that for global selfperceived proficiency the TA scores of the “Low” group
were significantly lower (p < .002) than those of the
“High” group. No significant difference emerged between
the Low and Medium group, nor between the Medium and
the High groups.
A one-way ANCOVA with age as a covariate was
performed to investigate the difference in TA between
the 1597 participants who grew up monolingually after
birth and the 422 participants who grew up with two or
more languages from birth. No significant difference was
found (F(2,1980) = .39, p = ns). Age was a significant
covariate (F(1,1980) = 14.3, p < .0001, (η2 = .007). A
separate analysis revealed no significant difference in TA
score between participants who had a bilingual upbringing
compared to the 18 participants who were trilingual from
birth.
A one-way ANCOVA with age as a covariate revealed
that the 1421 participants who had experienced a stay
abroad (i.e. a period of more than three months) scored
significantly higher on TA than the 568 participants who
had not lived abroad (Adjusted M = 29.2 compared
to Adjusted M = 27.9 respectively (F(2,1980) = 11.0,
p < .0001, η2 = .011). Age was a significant covariate
(F(1,1980) = 7.8, p < .005, η2 = .004).
Next we focus on the 1421 participants who had
lived abroad for more than three months. A one-way
ANCOVA with age as a covariate was conducted to
examine the effect of length of stay abroad on TA.

Two groups were created: the “short stay” group who
had stayed abroad between three months and one year
(n = 345) (i.e. typically students in exchange
programmes), and the “long stay” group who had stayed
abroad for more than one and up to 55 years (n =
1078). The short stay group scored significantly lower
on TA (Adjusted M = 28.5) compared to the long stay
group (Adjusted M = 30.0) respectively (F(2,1410) = 5.5,
p < .019, η2 = .005). Age was not a significant covariate
(F(1,1410) = 3.4, p = .064, η2 = .002). Further correlation
analysis showed that a longer period abroad (i.e. many
years) was not linked to higher levels of TA within the
long stay group.
A Pearson Chi2 analysis on the whole database revealed
that the group of participants who had stayed abroad had a
large proportion of participants knowing many languages
(Pearson-Chi2 = 84.2, df = 20, p < .0001). In order
to find out how much unique variance in the TA scores
is explained by the number of languages and the stay
abroad, we carried out a stepwise regression analysis.
For the stay abroad we distinguished four levels: from
zero to three months abroad, between three months and
one year, between one and 10 years, and over 10 years.
The analysis reveals that the two independent variables
contribute significantly to explaining the variance in TA
scores (see Table 1).
As shown in Table 1, 2.4% of the variance of TA is
explained by the model that included both independent
predictors (stay abroad and number of languages). The
inclusion of number of languages as an independent
variable leads to a significant increase in the amount of
variance explained in TA scores (r2 Change = .009, F
Change (1,1987) = 18.2, p Change < .0001).
Discussion
The results show that multilingualism and aspects of
individuals’ linguistic histories are linked to TA. Our
first hypothesis was confirmed, participants knowing
more languages scored significantly higher than those

Multilingualism and tolerance of ambiguity
knowing fewer languages on TA, even though the effect
size was small. The bilinguals occupied an intermediate
position between the monolinguals and those with three
or more languages. However, the scores of the trilinguals,
quadrilinguals, pentalinguals and sextalinguals were no
longer significantly different. This seems to suggest
that once the threshold of three languages is reached,
the effect of knowing additional languages no longer
affects the level of TA. A similar pattern emerged
in Dewaele and Stavans (in press) and Dewaele and
van Oudenhoven (2009), where the effect of knowing
more languages on Openmindedness levelled off beyond
knowledge and active use of respectively two and three
languages. We interpret the effect on TA as an indication
of multicompetence (Cook, 2010). The crucial aspect is
that the presence of various languages in one mind has
effects “that go beyond the actual knowledge of language
itself ” (Cook, 2002, p. 7).
Our second, more fine-grained, hypothesis was also
confirmed: a higher level of global proficiency in various
languages was linked with higher TA scores. Similar
effects for this corroborative variable were found on
Openmindedness (Dewaele & Stavans, in press) and
Cognitive Empathy (Dewaele & Li Wei, in press).
Our third hypothesis was rejected: participants who
had been brought up bi- or trilingually did not score
differently on TA compared to the majority who grew
up monolingually, and no difference existed between
those in bilingual or trilingual families. This suggests
that the mere presence of two languages/cultures in one’s
environment is insufficient to boost TA. A child growing
up in such a family is quickly aware of the two languages
used between family members but they are both familiar.
Further research is needed to see whether there might be
variation according to the type of multilingual family and
multilingual upbringing.
Our fourth hypothesis, concerning the effect of study
abroad on TA was confirmed: those who had never
stayed abroad scored significantly lower on TA compared
to those who had stayed abroad for more than three
months. Further analysis within the group who had
stayed abroad revealed a significant positive effect of
length of stay on TA up to the one-year mark, after
which the effect fades. A regression analysis established
that both the number of languages known and the
stay abroad were significant independent predictors of
TA. Here also the effect size was small. TA thus
seems to be boosted by sudden massive exposure to
unfamiliar languages and cultures (i.e. a “swim or sink”
situation). We had no information about the age at which
participants had found themselves abroad, which is a
potentially important variable as individuals with different
levels of cognitive maturity may react differently. The
person arriving in a foreign country quickly realises
that successful authentic communication in a foreign

237

language requires a mental switch (Regan, Howard &
Lemée, 2009). Bakalis and Joiner (2004) found a similar
effect of study abroad on Openness and TA among their
Australian students. Those who had participated in a study
abroad programme scored significantly higher on both
dimensions.
Although a causal relationship between a high level
of multilingualism and increased TA is very likely, it
needs to be considered carefully. Schrauf (to appear)
looked at the relationship between bilingual proficiency,
and both psychological and social factors. He concluded
that the causal pathway is in fact multidirectional,
where proficiency is both a cause and an effect. Indeed,
for our study one may argue that a higher level of
TA strengthens an individual’s curiosity and interest in
foreign languages. Similarly, it could be argued that
those participants who chose to live abroad might have
scored higher on TA before their departure compared to
those who did not live abroad. Indeed, Yashima (2010)
reported that participants who went abroad scored higher,
before departure, on dimensions that reflect intercultural
competence compared to control groups of peers who
remained in the home institution. However, the fact that
Yashima (2010) found a significant increase in the scores
of the volunteers on these dimensions at the end of the
project offers further support for our hypothesis that
TA increases as a consequence of intense multilingual
interactions. Moreover, the fact that those who had been
abroad for longer scored higher on TA than those who had
been abroad for a short period suggests that the stay has a
direct effect on TA. Although the effect seemed to stabilise
past the first year abroad, it suggests that the continued
exposure to a different language and cultural environment
boosts TA. One possible explanation for the levelling off
of the effect is that participants who had stayed abroad
between three months and one year might have done so
in educational exchanges, and as a consequence, could
consider their period outside their home environment as
an interesting parenthesis in their life, after which they
were sure to reintegrate their familiar home environment.
In other words, they might have felt more relaxed about
not fitting into the host society since they never intended to
develop roots there anyway. They could, to some degree,
bury their head in the sand. On the other hand, those
who had stayed for longer may have envisaged this new
environment as a permanent home, and may therefore
have strengthened their effort to value diverse others,
to develop intercultural TA and to become bicultural. In
the same vein, these people had to deal with unfamiliar
situations, become aware of ambiguity in cross-cultural
interactions and reflect on the differences between both
cultures. In order to survive, they would have had to
“stretch” themselves, manage conflicting perspectives and
solve the paradox of “seemingly irreconcilable realities”
(Herman et al., 2010, p. 63).

238

Jean-Marc Dewaele and Li Wei

Conclusion
The present study shows that the effect of multilingualism
extends beyond purely cognitive tasks. Our main
finding is that the knowledge of multiple languages
and the experience of having to survive in a foreign
language and culture make individuals more tolerant
of ambiguity. Although the effect of these independent
variables is only modest, it establishes that a personality
trait such as TA is linked to the knowledge of
foreign languages and reflects sudden changes in the
sociocultural and linguistic environment of individuals.
We argue that the need to survive in a foreign
environment forces people to become more attuned
to differences and brings with it an awareness that
their own values, beliefs and communicative practices
are not necessarily shared by their interlocutors. We
argue that the increased TA of multilinguals is a
reflection of multicompetence (Cook, 2010), making
them more tolerant individuals and therefore better
citizens.

9. On the scale from 1 (minimal fluency) to 5 (full
fluency) how do you rate yourself in oral and written
skills in all of your languages?
Oral

Written

L1a
L1b (if applicable)
L2
L3
L4
L5

Appendix B. Adapted version of the Tolerance for
Ambiguity questionnaire (Herman et al., 2010, p. 64)
1. I avoid situations where people don’t share my values.
[Reverse Coded]
2. I would like to live in a foreign country for a while.
3. I like to surround myself with things that are familiar
to me. [Reverse Coded]

Appendix A. Background information
1. Gender:

4. The sooner we all acquire similar values and ideals
the better. [Reverse Coded]

2. Age:

5. I can be comfortable with nearly all kinds of people.

3. Education level (highest qualification or current
programme of study):

6. If given a choice, I would visit a foreign country rather
than vacation at home.

4. Nationality:

7. A good teacher is one who makes you think
about/consider your way of looking at things.

5. Country of residence:
6. Have you lived abroad? YES/ NO (if yes: how many
years?):____
7. Which languages do you know? (according to the
order in which you learnt them; for First Language,
you can give more than one if you were brought up in
a multilingual family: L1a, L1b)
First language(s) (L1)____________ ____________
Second language (L2)____________
Third language (L3) ____________
Fourth language (L4)____________
Fifth language (L5)____________
Other languages (please specify) _______________
8. At what age did you start learning your L2, L3, L4,
L5?
L2 ____________
L3 ____________
L4 ____________
L5 ____________

8. A good job is one where what is to be done and how
it is to be done are always clear. [Reverse Coded]
9. A person who leads an even, regular life in which few
surprises or unexpected happenings arise really has a
lot to be grateful for. [Reverse Coded]
10. What we are used to is always preferable to what is
unfamiliar. [Reverse Coded]
11. I like parties where I know most of the people more
than ones where all or most of the people are complete
strangers. [Reverse Coded]
References
Aronin, L., & Singleton, D. (2012). Multilingualism.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bakalis, S., & Joiner, T. (2004). Participation in tertiary SA
programs: The role of personality. International Journal of
Educational Management, 18, 286–291.
Baran-Lucarz, M. (2012). Ego boundaries and attainments in FL
pronunciation. Studies in Second Language Learning and
Teaching, 2 (1), 45–66.

Multilingualism and tolerance of ambiguity
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., & Luk, G. (2012). Bilingualism:
Consequences for mind and brain. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 16, 240–250.
Budner, S. (1962). Intolerance of ambiguity as a personality
variable. Journal of Personality, 30 (1), 29–50.
Carlson, J., & Widaman, K. (1988). The effects of study
abroad during college on attitudes toward other cultures.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 12 (1), 1–
17.
Chapelle, C., & Roberts, C. (1986). Ambiguity Tolerance
and Field Independence as predictors of proficiency in
English as a second language. Language Learning, 36, 27–
45.
Cook, V. J. (2002). Introduction: Background of the L2 user. In
V. Cook (ed.), Portraits of the L2 user, pp. 1–28. Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
Cook, V. J. (2010). The relationship between first and second
language acquisition revisited. In E. Macaro (ed.), The
Continuum companion to second language acquisition,
pp. 137–157. London: Continuum.
Denissen, J. J. A., Neumann, L., & van Zalk, M. (2010).
How the Internet is changing the implementation of traditional research methods, people’s daily lives, and the way
in which developmental scientists conduct research. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 34 (6), 564–
575.
Dewaele, J.-M. (2010a). Emotions in multiple languages.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dewaele, J.-M. (2010b). Multilingualism and affordances:
Variation in self-perceived communicative competence and
communicative anxiety in French L1, L2, L3 and L4.
International Review of Applied Linguistics, 48, 105–
129.
Dewaele, J.-M., & Li Wei (in press). Multilingualism,
empathy and multicompetence. International Journal
of Multilingualism, doi: 10.1080/14790718.2012.714380.
Published online by Taylor & Francis, September 10, 2012.
Dewaele, J.-M., Petrides, K.V., & Furnham, A. (2008). The
effects of trait emotional intelligence and sociobiographical
variables on communicative anxiety and foreign language
anxiety among adult multilinguals: A review and empirical
investigation. Language Learning, 58 (4), 911–960.
Dewaele, J.-M., & Stavans, A. (in press). The effect of
immigration, acculturation and multicompetence on personality profiles of Israeli multilinguals. The International
Journal of Bilingualism, doi: 10.1177/1367006912439941.
Published online by Sage, April 26, 2012.
Dewaele, J.-M., & van Oudenhoven, J. P. (2009). The effect of
multilingualism/multiculturalism on personality: No gain
without pain for third culture kids? International Journal
of Multilingualism, 6 (4), 443–459.
Dörnyei, Z. (2007). Research methods in applied linguistics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ely, C. (1995) Tolerance of ambiguity and the teaching of
ESL. In J. M. Reid (ed.), Learning styles in the ESL/EFL
classroom, pp. 216–217. New York: Heinle & Heinle.
Eysenck, S., Eysenck, H. J., & Barrett, P. (1985). A
revised version of the Psychoticism scale. Personality and
Individual Differences, 6, 21–29.

239

Furnham, A. (1994). A content, correlational and factoranalytic study of 4 Tolerance of Ambiguity questionnaires.
Personality and Individual Differences, 16, 403–410.
Furnham, A., & Ribchester, T. (1995). Tolerance of ambiguity:
A review of the concept, its measurement and applications.
Current Psychology, 14 (3), 179–199.
Gosling, S. D., Srivastava, S., Pand, O., & John, O. P. (2004).
Should we trust web-based studies? A comparative analysis
of six preconceptions about internet questionnaires.
American Psychologist, 59, 93–104.
Herman, J. L., Stevens, M. J., Bird, A., Mendenhall,
M., & Oddou, G. (2010). The Tolerance for
Ambiguity Scale: Towards a more refined measure for
international management research. International Journal
of Intercultural Relations, 34, 58–65.
Kinginger, C. (2008). Language learning in study abroad: Case
studies of Americans in France. Oxford: Blackwell.
Korzilius, H., Van Hooft, A., Planken, B., & Hendrix, C.
(2011). Birds of different feathers? The relationship
between multicultural personality dimensions and foreign
language mastery in business professionals working in a
Dutch agricultural multinational. International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, 35, 540–553.
McCrae, R., Costa, Jr., P. T., Ostendorf, F., Angleitner,
A., Hrebícková, M., Avia, M. D., Sanz, J., SánchezBernardos, M. L., Kusdil, M. E., Woodfield, R., Saunders,
P. R., & Smith, P. B. (2000). Nature over nurture:
Temperament, personality, and life span development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78 (1), 173–
186.
McLain, D. L. (1993). The MSTAT-I: A new measure of
an individual’s tolerance for ambiguity. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 53, 183–189.
Nishida, H. (1985). Japanese intercultural communication
competence and cross-cultural adjustment. International
Journal of Intercultural Relations, 9, 247–269.
Oxford, R., & Ehrman, M. (1992). Second language research
on individual differences. Annual Review of Applied
Linguistics, 13, 188–205.
Pervin, L. A., & Cervone, D. (2010). Personality: Theory
and research (11th edn.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons.
Regan, V., Howard, M., & Lemée, I. (2009). The acquisition
of sociolinguistic competence in a study abroad context.
Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Reiterer, S. M., Singh, N. C., & Winkler, S. (to appear).
Predicting speech imitation ability biometrically. In B.
Stolterfoht & S. Featherstone (eds.), Investigating language
interpretation: Perspectives from the Fourth Linguistic
Evidence Meeting. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Rubin, J. (1975). What the ‘Good Language Learner’ can teach
us. TESOL Quarterly, 9, 41–51.
Rubin, J. (2008). Reflections. In C. Griffiths (ed.), Lessons from
good language learners, pp. 10–15. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schrauf, R. (to appear). Using correspondence analysis to model
immigrant multilingualism over time. In J. Duarte & I.
Gogolin (eds.), Linguistic super-diversity in urban areas –
research approaches. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

240

Jean-Marc Dewaele and Li Wei

Seravalle, V. (2011). Native, non-native and near-native accent:
The mediating role of identity in performance vs.
perception. Ph.D. dissertation, Royal Holloway, University
of London.
Wilson, R., & Dewaele, J.-M. (2010). The use of web
questionnaires in second language acquisition and

bilingualism research. Second Language Research, 26 (1),
103–123.
Yashima, T. (2010). The effects of international volunteer work
experiences on intercultural competence of Japanese youth.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 34, 268–
282.

