World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 16 2008

Creative Thinking Skill Approach
Through Problem-Based Learning: Pedagogy
and Practice in the Engineering Classroom
Halizah Awang, and Ishak Ramly

curricular activities [3]-[4]. Teachers are encouraged to use
methodologies to promote creative thinking and students are
encouraged to be innovative and come up with creative
products. Students can be encouraged to participate in this
process by enabling them to become aware of the ways in
which they think, learn and problem-solve. The way of
thinking will also attempts to involve students in the teachinglearning process through evaluations of what is taking place
during learning and can provide a window into the student’s
thinking processes.

Abstract—Problem-based learning (PBL) is one of the student
centered approaches and has been considered by a number of higher
educational institutions in many parts of the world as a method of
delivery. This paper presents a creative thinking approach for
implementing Problem-based Learning in Mechanics of Structure
within a Malaysian Polytechnics environment. In the learning
process, students learn how to analyze the problem given among the
students and sharing classroom knowledge into practice. Further,
through this course’s emphasis on problem-based learning, students
acquire creative thinking skills and professional skills as they tackle
complex, interdisciplinary and real-situation problems. Once the
creative ideas are generated, there are useful additional techniques
for tender ideas that will grow into a productive concept or solution.
The combination of creative skills and technical abilities will enable
the students to be ready to “hit-the-ground-running” and produce in
industry when they graduate.

II. PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING
Problem-based learning (PBL) is one of the student
centered approaches and has been considered by a number of
higher educational institutions in many parts of the world as a
method of delivery. PBL is a total pedagogical approach to
education that focuses on helping students develop selfdirected learning skills. It derives from the theory that
learning is a process in which the learner actively constructs
new knowledge on the basis of current knowledge. PBL
provides students with the opportunity to gain theory and
content knowledge and comprehension. PBL helps students
develop advanced cognitive abilities such as creative thinking,
problem solving and communication skills [2]-[4].
Through Problem-based learning (PBL), students use
“triggers” from the problem case or scenario to define their
own learning objectives. Subsequently they do independent,
self directed learning before returning to the group to discuss
and refine their acquired knowledge. Thus, PBL is not only
about problem solving, but rather it uses appropriate problems
to increase knowledge and understanding.
Group learning facilitates not only the acquisition of
knowledge but also several other desirable attributes such as
communication skills, teamwork, problem solving,
independent responsibility for learning, sharing information
and respect for others. PBL can therefore be thought of as a
small group teaching method that combines the acquisition of
knowledge with the development of generic skills and
attitudes. Presentation of technical material as the stimulus for
learning enables students to understand the relevance of
underlying scientific knowledge and principles in technical
practice.
However, when PBL is introduced into a curriculum,

Keywords—Creative Thinking Skills, Problem-based Learning,
Problem Solving.
I. INTRODUCTION

S

OCIETY nowadays becomes complicated and dynamic.
In order to suit society’s needs, it is undesirable for
universities and colleges to produce graduates who can only
work within the restricted framework of solving textbook
problems. People are expected to accommodate variations in
the demands of everyday tasks [1]. Thus, universities or
colleges should also modify their education system to match
the requirements of industry and commerce. Curriculum
should be reformed to create classroom in which students are
challenged to think creatively about subjects by discovering,
understanding, analyzing and applying knowledge in new
situations [2].
In Malaysia, efforts are being made to foster creative
thinking and problem solving through curricular and coThis study was supported by the Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia,
Polytechnic of Malaysia, Universiti Sains Malaysia and Universiti Tun
Hussein Onn Malaysia.
Halizah Awang is with the Faculty of Technical Education, Universiti
Teknologi Tun Hussein Onn, Malaysia, 86400 Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Johor,
Malaysia (phone: 605-7174762; fax: 605-7174762; e-mail: halizah@
uthm.edu.my).
Ishak Ramly is with the School of Education, Universiti Sains Malaysia,
11800, Penang, Malaysia (phone: 604-65333235; fax: 604-6572907; e-mail:
rishak@usm.my).

635

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 16 2008

III. PROBLEM SOLVING

several other issues for curriculum design and implementation
need to be tackled. PBL is generally introduced in the context
of a define core curriculum and integration of basic and
sciences. It has implications for staffing and learning
resources and demands a different approach to timetabling,
workload and assessment.
Recently, modified PBL
techniques have been introduced into technical education with
real problem being used as the stimulus for learning.

Teaching students to provide, as fast as possible, the one
correct answer to a problem, does not contribute towards
fostering students problem-solving abilities. If the emphasis is
on the correct solution, the student’s originality and creativity
can be stifled [6]. In the learning process, students learn how
to analyze the problem given among the students and sharing
classroom knowledge into practice. Further, through this
course’s emphasis on problem-based learning, students
acquire creative thinking skills and professional skills as they
tackle complex, interdisciplinary and real-situation problems.
There’s nothing as theoretically interesting as good
practice. This is particularly true of efforts to relate
constructivism and creative thinking as a theory of learning to
the practice of instruction and for helping students become
more effective problem solvers. Problem solving is often seen
as an experimental study requiring first-hand student
participation and gathering evidence that permits a question
posed to be answered. There is the need for students to think
creatively forwarding hypotheses, point out ways of solving
the problem and carry out a careful analysis of the results.

Ideas, prior knowledge, learning issues

Identify Problem

Self-directed
Learning

No
Group Discussion
Yes
No
Problem
Solving/Decision

IV. CREATIVE THINKING SKILLS
Yes

At the simplest level “creative” means bringing into being
something that was not there before and has been brought into
being. The word “creativity” covers a wide range of different
skills. Creative skills needed to change concepts and
perceptions.
In most descriptions of problem solving, there is usually a
step called “search for alternatives”. This implies that
creativity is needed in this step. Creativity is poorly
understood and difficult to teach but there are positive
techniques that everyone can learn. Edward de Bono notes
creative techniques such as focus, challenge, alternatives,
concepts etc [7]. Creative thinking should take its place
alongside our other methods of handling information. A
person sitting down with the deliberate intention of generating
an idea in a certain area and then proceeding to use a creative
thinking technique systematically should represent a normal
state of affairs.
Creative thinking will make students move “sideways” to
try different perceptions, different concepts, different points of
entry.
Students can use various methods including
provocations to solve the problems. Creative thinking has
very much to do with perception to put forward different
views. The different views are not derived each from the
other but are independently produced. In this sense, creative
thinking has to do with exploration just as perception has to
do with exploration.
What causes creativity in the individual? Can the creative
process be identified? A widely used of creativity tests is
Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking (TTCT)[9]-[10]. Three
creative abilities measured by these tests are originality,
fluency and flexibility. These abilities are defined as;
originality: the ability to produce uncommon or unique

Presentation

Assessment

Debrief the Problem
(Students Interaction,
Applying Generic Skills)

Final Solution

Fig. 1 Flowchart of Problem Solving Process in PBL

Fig. 1 shows the flowchart of problem solving process in
Problem-based Learning approach. PBL exercises typically
proceed through four phases – problem presentation, problem
investigation, problem solution and process evaluation. The
problem would be a real-world situation, complex and openended that will challenge higher-order thinking, creativity and
synthesis of knowledge [5]. Problem-Based Learning helps
students develop creative thinking skills such as cooperative
and interdisciplinary problem solving. Students learn to work
both independently and collaboratively. Even though students
engage in self-directed learning through PBL, they regularly
convene to share, evaluate and critique each other’s work
during the group meeting. They deal with multiple and often
conflicting goals and values, work with constraints and
determine the most appropriate action to take.

636

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 16 2008

group that has the concern or problem will organize its own
deliberate creative thinking session to tackle the problem.

responses; fluency: ability to produce a large number of ideas;
flexibility: the ability to produce a variety of ideational themes
or categories.
Originality in the technical context is the ability to find new
ways to adapt existing ideas to new conditions. The habit of
always asking questions about a situation will make student
creative in thinking. They are always asking questions such
as: “Why do we do this?” How can we improve this design?”
Is this really safe for the building?” Originality is nurtured
when students are willing to challenge the obvious.
Idea fluency is the ability to generate a large number of
ideas from which to choose. Research has indicated that the
more ideas one has the greater is the likelihood of finding a
usable solution. Delaying evaluation of the ideas during the
process of generating ideas can facilitate idea fluency.
Students can make notes, records their observations and
opinions of problems in a way to assist in the process of idea
fluency. A different way for developing idea fluency is to use
special times or locations in which students tend to make a
discussion in creative way.
Flexibility is the ability to consider a wide variety of rather
dissimilar approaches to a solution. To be flexible, students
need to be aware of mental blocks that can lock them into a
fixed way of doing a particular thing in a specific manner.
In their work habits, the creative students were more
flexible and more willing to shift approaches when faced with
a complex problem [4]. They tend to spend more time in the
initial steps of problem identification and desired greater
variety of potential solutions in the solution finding stage.
Edward De Bono identified that there are two broad and
distinguishable uses of creativity. One of these is “everyday”
creativity in which creativity becomes part of normal thinking
and can therefore be applied to any situations that require
thinking [7]. This should happen without any formal or
deliberate effort. Then there is specific creativity where a
definite need has been defined. In this case there is a formal
and deliberate effort to use the systematic techniques of
creative thinking to generate new ideas. There are three
aspects to for creativity:
1.
2.
3.

Evaluation and Implementation
The group that has the creative focus may also be involved
in evaluating the ideas that come out of the deliberate creative
thinking. In such cases the process is continuous. If the
“thinking” group is different from the “implementation”
group, attention has to be paid to the transfer of ideas so that
those expected to act on the idea are brought in at an early
enough stage to feel some ownership in the new ideas.
Learning with creative thinking is important to be creative
at each stage of discussion. The definition of thinking task
needs to be creative. The structure for applying thinking
process needs to be creative. The output of thinking effort
needs to be creative.
Finally, the evaluation and
implementation needs to be creative.
Creative thinking needs a framework of application;
otherwise, students are not going to find themselves in a
position where they are expected to generate new ideas. No
matter how good the techniques may be, if they are not used,
they will not achieve much.
V. METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION
A quasi-experimental pretest-posttest was used in the study.
The population for this study consisted 60 students of
Diploma in Civil Engineering in Malaysian Polytechnics.
From the targeted population, samples were randomly divided
into two groups of learning method as shown in Fig. 2.
Phase I

PBL Briefing

Week 1-8

Teaching & Learning Process
(Dip. in Civil Eng.)

Phase II

PBL,A
(N=30)

Defining the focus or creative task
Structure for the deliberate application of the
systematic creative thinking tools
Evaluation and implementation of the output of the
creative thinking

Convensional,B
(N=30)

Week 9-10

Assessment

Collect &
Data Analyze

Conclusion

Defining the Focus
There may be problems that arise and identify themselves.
Individuals make definite creative focuses. There may be an
obvious creative need. All these are ways in which creative
focuses can emerge.

Fig. 2 Flowchart of Quasi-experimental Design

They are group A as an experimental group and group B as
a control group for the session. The measured dependent
variables in this study were the students skills in creative
thinking and the independent variables were the mode of
teaching. The instrument used to determine the dependent
variables were the pre-test and post-test of Torrance Test of
Creative Thinking (TTCT)[8].

Structure for Creative Thinking
Once the creative focus has been defined, it can be
subjected to deliberate creative thinking. This can be done by
groups or individuals or a combination of both in a discussion
session among group members. It often happens that the

637

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 16 2008

This paper proposes a Problem-Based Learning model of
Howard Barrows that uses the McKinsey strategic problemsolving model and the SSCS model for teaching structural
problems in Mechanics of Structure in Polytechnic of
Malaysia [9]-[10]. The McKinsey model was adapted for
engineering need. This need comes from an engineering
problem. Once a problem has been identified, the next step is
analyzing the problem. McKinsey calls this step “framing the
problem” and breaking it down into its component elements in
order to come up with an initial hypothesis as to the solution
[11]. Designing the analysis is the next step in this model.
Student must determine the analysis that must be done to
prove the hypothesis. This step also includes developing
work plans for group study efforts. Next, is gathering the data
by emphasizing the use of fact finding and interviewing as a
source of information gathering.

Managing:
Team, self, time

Information

Problem

Solution
Intuition

Data
Analyzing information::
o
Framing-hypothesis-issue trees
o
Designing outline-work plan
o
Gathering data-facts-interview
o
Interpreting-analyzing-evaluating

Fig. 3 McKinsey Model

TABLE I
PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING MODEL

A : Form
Student
Group
Assign work :
Assign group
leader
Plans, manages
and controls
the session
Assistant
Take notes
during
discussion
Group
members
Participate
actively in the
meeting

B : Student
Preparation
(Giving the
problem)
Problem
discussion
Stating
hypothesis,
assign
tasks
among
the
group

LEARNING PROCESS AND PROBLEM SOLVING
C : Tutorial 1
D : SelfE : Tutorial 2
(Building by
directed
(Bridging the
group process)
Learning
processing
skills)
Tutor guidance Explore the
Tutor guidance
using creative information
using cognitive
thinking skills
and creative
Notes,
thinking
Discussion
references,
approach
among group internet
members
Concept map,
students
Define problem
discussion,
decision
Describe
making on
problem
problem
scenario
solution.
according to
prior
knowledge

F:
Presentation

Tutor guidance
using cognitive
skills
Students
enhance their
ability on
generic skills

G : Debrief
the problem

Tutor
evaluation
Evaluation/
Conclusion
from students
for the
presentation

Discussion and
assign tasks
CREATIVE THINKING SKILLS (adapted from Infor Resources System)
Explore the Challenge
Generate Ideas
Prepare for Action
Goal:Generate many ideas to help you solve your well- Goal:Turn promising ideas into
Goal:Fully understand the
workable solutions.
defined problem.
problem by examining the
situation and restating the problem Start here when:You need novel approach, useful
Start here when:You have some
in as many ways as possible.
good ideas that need strengthening.
ideas to solve your problem.
Start here when:You want to
Diverge: Phrase your best ideas as
Diverge: Come up with many ideas that might solve
pinpoint the right problem to
solutions, using the statement
your problem. Keep going!Even as you see good ideas
solve.
starter:”What I see myself doing
emerge, keep pushing for novelty.
is....”Consider what you like,
Diverge: Restate the issue from as Converge: Select the most promising and intriguing
Potentials (what it might lead to if
many perspectives as possible.
ideas to pursue.
implemented) and Concerns(ask
Use the statement starters:How
Finish with:An idea or selected list of ideas to help
“How to...” “How might...” or “In
to...How might...In what ways
solve the problem.
what ways might...”.Generate ideas
might....
to overcome the concerns.
Converge: Select the statement
Converge: Select the best ideas to
that best identifies the issue you
overcome your concerns.
want to work on.
Rephrase those ideas into a new
Finish with:A well defined
and improved statement of the
statement of the problem.
solution using the statement starter:
“What I now see myself doing
is.....”
Finish with:A well developed,
detailed and improved solution.

638

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 16 2008

problem. During this process, students focused on what they
did not know and hence found out materials in order to solve
the problem outside class time. The role of the tutor was to
facilitate the students as to identify the location of the
necessary resources. After the session, the all student engage
in self-directed learning. There are no assigned texts. Rather
the students are totally responsible for gathering the
information from the available library and computer database
resources. After self-directed learning, the students meet
again to emphasize the use of fact finding and interviewing as
a source of information gathering. At these stages (stage C, D
& E), Student was expected to come up with many ideas that
might solve the problem. The last parts of the model are
creating the final presentation and debrief the problem and the
students have to share their knowledge during the
presentation.

As shown in Fig. 3, time management is very important in
McKinsey model. There is never enough time to get all
possible data. It is up to the student to find the most pertinent
data in the least amount of time. Interpreting the results is the
final step, analyzing and evaluating to test the hypothesis.
SSCS model specifically for science instruction on the
premise that for a problem to be meaningful to a student, it
needs to be identified and defined by the student and that
students meaningfully learn problem-solving skills and
science concepts. As shown in Fig. 4, this model consists of
four phases; Search, Solve, Create and Share as shown in Fig.
3[6].

Search

Solve

Create

Share

Brainstorming to identify problem,
generate a list of ideas to explore, put
into question format and focus on
investigation

VI. FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION

Generate and implement plans for
finding a solution, develope critical
and creative thinking skills, form
hypothesis, select the method for
solving the problem, collect data and
analyze

Table II shows the results of Creative Thinking Skills
referred to originality, fluency and flexibility components for
students with different learning approaches in both
experimental and control classes.
TABLE II

Student create a product in a small
scale to the problem solution, reduce
the data to simpler levels of
explanation, present the results as
creatively as possible such using
charts, poster or model.

MEAN SCORES FOR CREATIVE THINKING

Method
PBL
Conventional

Originality
Pre
Post
38.27
46.77
34.58
40.22

Fluency
Pre
Post
48.45
58.91
41.56
49.88

Flexibility
Pre
Post
35.18
39.19
29.51
30.51

The findings indicate that the overall creativity of students
is characterized mainly by two component abilities names
originality and fluency. Students who achieve a high score on
originality have the ability to produce ideas which are
unexpected. The highest score on fluency shows that students
are capable of producing a large number of ideas in response
to problem-solving situations. The flexibility scores defined
that most of students not flexible in their approach to learning
and acquisition of concepts.
The results of the study indicate that Problem-based
Learning approach could raise-up the creative thinking skills
of students compared to Conventional Learning approach.

Students communicate their findings,
solution and conclusions with
teacher and students, articulate their
thinking, receive feedback and
evaluate the solutions.

Fig. 4 Model SSCS

Problem-based Learning that used in this paper begin with
the group assign as shown in Table I. The member of each
group 4-5 students consist of group leader, assistant and
members. This PBL model started with a unstructured
problem that given to the group of students. These problems
were similar in nature to the real problem but on a smaller
scale. Students need to explore creatively in thinking the
issues of the problem by using the statement starters; How
to...How might.... to identify the problem [12]. Once the
problem has been identified, the next step is framing the
problem and breaking it down in its component elements in
order to come up with an initial hypothesis, identifying
relevant facts in the case and identifying learning issues.
Tutor guidance was provided in the first tutorial sessions.
Each student has an opportunity to verbally reflect on their
current beliefs about the diagnosis and assume responsibility
for particular learning that was identified. The students
generate the learning issues based on their analysis of the

VII. CONCLUSION
Our goal in this paper was to present PBL as an
instructional model that could encourage the creative thinking
skills during the learning process. Once the creative ideas are
generated, there are useful additional techniques for tender
ideas that will grow into a productive concept or solution.
Even though students perceived that learning through PBL
was difficult, they said that they did more thinking than
memorizing, understood the lessons better through discussion
and could accept this method of instruction.
Creative skills must be practiced until the thought patterns
in our minds become comfortable with these creative lateral
thinking techniques. We can create these creative grooves in

639

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 16 2008

[3]

Yong, L.S.M. (1986). A study a creativity and its correlates among form
4 pupils. Tesis Ph.D yang tidak diterbitkan, Universiti Malaya.
[4] Yong, L.S.M. (1993). Study in Creativity. Incotrends (M) Sdn Bhd.
Kuala Lumpur.
[5] Steinemann, A., (2003). Implementing Sustainable Development
Through Problem-Based Learning:Pedagogy and Practice. Journal of
Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice. Oct.
[6] Chin, C. (1997). Promoting Higher Cognitive Learning in Science
through a Problem Solving Approach REACT, Issue No.1.
[7] De Bono, E. (1993). Serious Creativity: Using the Power of Interal
Thinking To Create New Ideas. New York: Harper Collins.
[8] Torrance, E.P. (1966). Thinking Creatively with Words: Verbal Booklet
A. Benseville, IL: Scholastic Testing Service, Inc.
[9] Barrows, H. (2003). Response To “The Problem with Problem Based
Medical Education: Promises Not Kept” by R.H Gkew. Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology Education. Vol. 31, no.4, pp. 255-256.
[10] Barrows, H.S. (1996). Problem-Based Learning In Medicine And
Beyond:Abrief Overview. In Lory and Practice (Vol.68, Pp3-12. San
Francisco:Jossey-Bass.
[11] Donaldson, C.A (2004). Information Literacy and the McKinsey Model:
Literacy to Graduate Business Students. Library Philosophy and Practice
Vol. 6, no.2.
[12] Infor Resources System Sdn. Bhd. (2001). Creativity and Creative
Problem Solving. IRSSB Selangor.

our mind so these techniques will be utilized. This also can
help students produce better, more satisfying and more
creative. The combination of creative skills and technical
abilities will enable the students to be ready for industry needs
when they graduate.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the Ministry of Higher Education,
Malayia, Polytechnic of Malaysia, Universiti Sains Malaysia
and Universiti Teknologi Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia for their
cooperation.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

Soden, R., Teaching Problem Solving in Vocational Education. London:
Routledge (1994).
Claire Major (2001). Assessing The Effectiveness Of Problem Based
Learning in Higher Education: Lessons From The Literature, vol. 5(1).

640

