Psychological Bulletin
2003, Vol. 129, No. 3, 339 –375

Copyright 2003 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0033-2909/03/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.129.3.339

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Political Conservatism as Motivated Social Cognition
John T. Jost

Jack Glaser

Stanford University

University of California, Berkeley

Arie W. Kruglanski

Frank J. Sulloway

University of Maryland at College Park

University of California, Berkeley

Analyzing political conservatism as motivated social cognition integrates theories of personality (authoritarianism, dogmatism–intolerance of ambiguity), epistemic and existential needs (for closure,
regulatory focus, terror management), and ideological rationalization (social dominance, system justification). A meta-analysis (88 samples, 12 countries, 22,818 cases) confirms that several psychological
variables predict political conservatism: death anxiety (weighted mean r ⫽ .50); system instability (.47);
dogmatism–intolerance of ambiguity (.34); openness to experience (–.32); uncertainty tolerance (–.27);
needs for order, structure, and closure (.26); integrative complexity (–.20); fear of threat and loss (.18);
and self-esteem (–.09). The core ideology of conservatism stresses resistance to change and justification
of inequality and is motivated by needs that vary situationally and dispositionally to manage uncertainty
and threat.

Rokeach, 1960; Shils, 1954), but it has withstood the relentless
tests of time and empirical scrutiny (e.g., Altemeyer, 1981, 1988,
1996, 1998; Billig, 1984; Brown, 1965; Christie, 1991; Elms,
1969; Sidanius, 1985; W. F. Stone, 1980; W. F. Stone, Lederer, &
Christie, 1993; Tetlock, 1984; Wilson, 1973c). A voluminous
literature, which we review here, facilitates the comparison of
cognitive styles and motivational needs of political conservatives
with those of moderates, liberals, radicals, and left-wingers. In
addition to classic and contemporary approaches to authoritarianism, we cover less obvious sources of theory and research on
individual differences associated with dogmatism and intolerance
of ambiguity, uncertainty avoidance, need for cognitive closure,
and social dominance orientation (SDO) insofar as each of these
psychological variables contributes to a deeper and more nuanced
understanding of political conservatism.
The study of authoritarianism and other personality theories of
political attitudes is often dismissed a priori as an illegitimate,
value-laden attempt to correlate general psychological profiles
with specific ideological beliefs (e.g., Durrheim, 1997; J. L. Martin, 2001; Ray, 1988). The psychological study of ideological
conservatism is one that invites controversy (e.g., Redding, 2001;
Sears, 1994; Sidanius, Pratto, & Bobo, 1996; Sniderman & Tetlock, 1986; Tetlock, 1994; Tetlock & Mitchell, 1993), but this
circumstance does not mean that researchers should avoid it. Our
view is that it is a legitimate empirical issue whether there are
demonstrable links between a clearly defined set of psychological
needs, motives, and properties and the adoption of politically
conservative attitudes. The measurement of individual differences
is an excellent starting point for understanding the psychological
basis of political ideology, but we argue that approaching political
conservatism exclusively from the standpoint of personality theory
is a mistake. The hypothesis that people adopt conservative ideologies in an effort to satisfy various social– cognitive motives
requires a novel theoretical perspective that overcomes two crucial
limitations of traditional research on the psychology of
conservatism.

Conservatism is a demanding mistress and is giving me a migraine.
—George F. Will, Bunts

For more than half a century, psychologists have been tracking
the hypothesis that different psychological motives and tendencies
underlie ideological differences between the political left and the
right. The practice of singling out political conservatives for special study began with Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, Levinson, and
Sanford’s (1950) landmark study of authoritarianism and the fascist potential in personality. An asymmetrical focus on right-wing
authoritarianism (RWA) was criticized heavily on theoretical and
methodological grounds (e.g., Christie, 1954; Eysenck, 1954;

John T. Jost, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University; Jack
Glaser, Goldman School of Public Policy, University of California, Berkeley; Arie W. Kruglanski, Department of Psychology, University of Maryland at College Park; Frank J. Sulloway, Institute of Personality and Social
Research, University of California, Berkeley.
This work first began while John T. Jost was a postdoctoral fellow at the
University of Maryland at College Park, supported by National Institute of
Mental Health Grant R01-MH52578, National Science Foundation Grant
SBR-9417422, and a Research Scientist Award KO5-MHO 1213 to Arie
W. Kruglanski. Work continued while Jack Glaser was a postdoctoral
fellow at the Institute of Personality and Social Research at the University
of California, Berkeley and sponsored by National Institute of Mental
Health Grant F32-MH12195 and while Arie W. Kruglanski (supported by
National Science Foundation Grant SBR-9022192) and Frank J. Sulloway
were fellows at the Center for Advanced Studies of Behavioral Sciences at
Stanford University. Further financial and administrative support for this
project was provided by the Graduate School of Business at Stanford
University and the Jackson Library Document Delivery Service.
We are grateful for exceedingly helpful comments on previous versions
of this article by Jeff Greenberg, E. Tory Higgins, Orsolya Hunyady, and
Jim Sidanius. We also wish to thank Robert Rosenthal for statistical advice.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to John T.
Jost, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305. E-mail: jost_john@gsb.stanford.edu
339

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

340

First, too many measures of individual differences have conflated psychological and political variables in an attempt to measure a construct that is really a hybrid of the two. Wilson (1973c),
for instance, offered an amalgamated definition of conservatism as
“resistance to change and the tendency to prefer safe, traditional
and conventional forms of institutions and behaviour” (p. 4).
However, Wilson and Patterson’s (1968) Conservatism Scale (CScale)—which is the psychological instrument that has been most
widely used to measure conservatism— combines nonpolitical
stimuli that are meant to elicit general attitudes concerning uncertainty avoidance (e.g., modern art, jazz music, horoscopes) and
stimuli that have explicitly political referents (e.g., death penalty,
legalized abortion, socialism, religion). The fact that such a seemingly heterogeneous scale would exhibit reasonable psychometric
properties with respect to reliability and validity suggests that
Wilson and his colleagues were accurately perceiving a link between general epistemic motivations and conservative ideology
(see also Bagley, Wilson, & Boshier, 1970; Wilson, 1973a). Nevertheless, theoretical and empirical efforts are generally hampered
by the failure to distinguish clearly between psychological and
ideological variables (Sniderman & Tetlock, 1986).
Second, treating political conservatism solely as an individualdifference variable neglects growing evidence that situational factors influence the experience and expression of conservatism (e.g.,
Crowe & Higgins, 1997; Greenberg et al., 1990; Jost, Kruglanski,
& Simon, 1999; Kruglanski & Webster, 1991; Sales & Friend,
1973; Sulloway, 1996, 2001). If classic personality theories are
correct in positing that character rigidity and motivational threat
are related to the holding of conservative attitudes, then system
instability and other threatening circumstances should also increase conservative tendencies in the population as a whole (e.g.,
Fromm, 1941; McCann, 1997; Reich, 1946/1970; Sales, 1972,
1973; Sanford, 1966). In an effort to stimulate innovative approaches to the study of situations as well as dispositions that
foster ideological conservatism, we cast a wide net in reviewing
theories of motivated social cognition that are not conventionally
regarded as political in nature, including theories of lay epistemics,
regulatory focus, and terror management. Thus, we argue that
tendencies toward political conservatism are influenced by a multiplicity of social– cognitive motives.

Overview
We propose that a motivated social– cognitive approach offers
the greatest potential for unifying relatively diverse theories and
findings related to the psychological basis of political conservatism—that is, theories and findings that link social and cognitive
motives to the contents of specific political attitudes. Specifically,
we distill key insights from theories of personality and individual
differences, theories of epistemic and existential needs, and sociopolitical theories of ideology as individual and collective rationalizations. Following this eclectic review of theoretical perspectives,
we examine the balance of evidence for and against several variants of the hypothesis that people embrace political conservatism
(at least in part) because it serves to reduce fear, anxiety, and
uncertainty; to avoid change, disruption, and ambiguity; and to
explain, order, and justify inequality among groups and individuals. Treating political conservatism as a special case of motivated
social cognition (a) goes beyond traditional individual-difference
approaches; (b) maintains a clear distinction between psycholog-

ical motives and political outcomes and helps to explain relations
between the two; (c) highlights situational as well as dispositional
variables that relate to conservatism; (d) takes into account a wider
variety of epistemic, existential, and ideologically defensive motivations than has been considered previously; and (e) provides an
integrative framework for understanding how these motives work
together to reduce and manage fear and uncertainty.

The Motivated Social–Cognitive Perspective
To set the stage, we use the term motivated social cognition to
refer to a number of assumptions about the relationship between
people’s beliefs and their motivational underpinnings (e.g.,
Bruner, 1957; Duckitt, 2001; Dunning, 1999; Fiske & Taylor,
1991; Greenwald, 1980; Hastorf & Cantril, 1954; Higgins, 1998;
Kruglanski, 1996; Kunda, 1990; Rokeach, 1960). In the postFreudian world, the ancient dichotomy between reason and passion
is blurred, and nearly everyone is aware of the possibility that
people are capable of believing what they want to believe, at least
within certain limits. Our first assumption, too, is that conservative
ideologies—like virtually all other belief systems—are adopted in
part because they satisfy some psychological needs. This does not
mean that conservatism is pathological or that conservative beliefs
are necessarily false, irrational, or unprincipled. From the present
perspective, most human beliefs are subjectively rational in the
sense of being deduced from a set of premises to which believers
subscribe (Kruglanski, 1999; Kruglanski & Thompson, 1999a,
1999b), and they are also at least partially responsive to reality
constraints (Kunda, 1990). In this sense, any given person’s conservatism may well be principled in that it is related logically or
psychologically to other observations, values, beliefs, and premises. At the same time, adherence to principles and syllogistic
reasoning do not occur in a motivational vacuum but rather in the
context of a variety of virtually inescapable personal and social
motivations (e.g., Hastorf & Cantril, 1954; Kunda, 1990; Lord,
Ross, & Lepper, 1979) that are not necessarily consciously accessible (e.g., Kruglanski, 1996, 1999). Thus, political attitudes may
well be principled (e.g., Sniderman, Piazza, Tetlock, & Kendrick,
1991; Sniderman & Tetlock, 1986) and motivationally fueled at
the same time.

General Theoretical Assumptions
We find it useful to distinguish between directional and nondirectional motives involved in belief formation. Directional motives
reflect the desire to reach a specific conclusion, such as that the
self is worthy or valuable (e.g., Dunning, 1999; Greenwald, 1980;
Kunda, 1990), that Republican leaders are benevolent and moral
(e.g., Lind, 1996), that the economy will improve, or that one’s
position of privilege will be preserved (Sears & Funk, 1991;
Sidanius, 1984). By contrast, nondirectional motives, such as the
“need to know” (Rokeach, 1960), the need for nonspecific closure
(Kruglanski & Webster, 1996), the fear of invalidity (Kruglanski
& Freund, 1983), and the need for cognition (Cacioppo & Petty,
1982) reflect the desire to arrive at a belief or understanding,
independent of its content. Both directional and nondirectional
motives are assumed to affect belief formation by determining the
extent of information processing (Ditto & Lopez, 1992), bringing
about selective exposure to information (Frey, 1986) and affecting
other modes of processing available information (Kruglanski,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

1996). The possibility that we consider in this article is that a kind
of matching process takes place whereby people adopt ideological
belief systems (such as conservatism, RWA, and SDO) that are
most likely to satisfy their psychological needs and motives (such
as needs for order, structure, and closure and the avoidance of
uncertainty or threat).1
A theoretical assumption we make is that the same motives may
underlie different beliefs and that different motives may underlie
the same belief. The need for self-enhancement, for example,
could lead one to praise or to criticize another person, by preserving a concept of self that is either generous or superior, respectively. Similarly, the belief that a friend, spouse, or family member
is praiseworthy could arise not only from self-enhancement but
also from needs for impression management, cognitive consistency, and accuracy. In the context of political conservatism, this
means that (a) a temporary motive (such as the need for cognitive
closure or prevention focus or terror management) could lead one
to express liberal as well as conservative beliefs, depending on
one’s chronically accessible ideology (Greenberg, Simon, Pyszczynski, Solomon, & Chatel, 1992; Jost et al., 1999; Liberman,
Idson, Camacho, & Higgins, 1999), and (b) some people might
adopt conservative beliefs out of a desire for certainty, whereas
others adopt the same beliefs because of a threat to self-esteem or
an ideological threat to the system.
From our theoretical perspective, motivational and informational influences on belief formation are not at all incompatible.
On the contrary, in most cases they are both necessary, and they
work together in any instance of belief formation, although their
functions in the belief formation process are very different. Information serves as evidence that provides the basis for forming
beliefs at either a conscious or unconscious level. Some of this
evidence is derived from source expertise (Kruglanski & Thompson, 1999a, 1999b; McGuire, 1985) and “referent informational
influence” (Turner, 1991), and these factors help to explain why
parents and other authority figures are effective at socializing
children to hold specific political beliefs (e.g., Altemeyer, 1981,
1988, 1996; Rohan & Zanna, 1998; Sears, 1983). Other information is contained in messages (or arguments) rather than sources
(Kruglanski & Thompson, 1999b), and this information may be
more readily assimilated when it is perceived as providing support
for prior beliefs (e.g., Hastorf & Cantril, 1954; Lord et al., 1979).
Thus, information often plays a rationalizing or legitimizing role in
the construction and preservation of ideological belief systems.
Whether specific beliefs may be considered objectively true or
false has little (or nothing) to do with the subjective reasons for
believing. Arriving at desired conclusions may be considered
epistemologically valid only if the evidence supports those conclusions. Motives to maintain security or resolve uncertainty or to
avoid threat or prevent negative outcomes might lead one to adopt
beliefs that are, for example, socially or economically conservative, but the degree to which these beliefs are rational or correct
must be assessed independently of the motivations that drive them
(Kruglanski, 1989). Thus, it does not follow from our motivated
social– cognitive analysis that politically conservative beliefs (or
any other beliefs) are false simply because they are motivated by
epistemic, existential, and ideological concerns.
A motivated social– cognitive approach is one that emphasizes
the interface between cognitive and motivational properties of the
individual as they impact fundamental social psychological phenomena (e.g., Bruner, 1957; Dunning, 1999; Fiske & Taylor, 1991;

341

Greenwald, 1980; Higgins, 1998; Kruglanski, 1996; Kunda, 1990).
It may be distinguished from several other psychological approaches. For instance, our approach departs from the assumptions
of “cold cognitive” approaches to attitudes and social judgment,
which discount motivational constructs as explanations, favoring
instead information-processing limitations and mechanisms as determinants of social judgments (e.g., Hamilton & Rose, 1980;
D. T. Miller & Ross, 1975; Srull & Wyer, 1979). “Hot cognitive”
approaches highlight the pervasive role that affect and motivation
play in attention, memory, judgment, decision making, and human
reasoning, as well as highlighting the cognitive, goal-directed
aspects of most motivational phenomena (e.g., Bargh & Gollwitzer, 1994; Kruglanski, 1996). Ideology is perhaps the quintessential example of hot cognition, in that people are highly motivated
to perceive the world in ways that satisfy their needs, values, and
prior epistemic commitments (Abelson, 1995).

Distinguishing Motivated Social Cognition From Other
Theories of Conservatism
With regard to other theories of conservatism, a motivated
social– cognitive perspective may be distinguished from (a) a
stable individual-differences approach; (b) a pure instrumental or
self-interest theory of conservatism; and (c) theories of modeling,
imitation, or simple reinforcement. Although we suggest in this
review that there may be individual differences associated with
political conservatism (such as authoritarianism, intolerance of
ambiguity, need for cognitive closure), we also argue that there
should be considerable situational variation in expressions of conservative tendencies. Thus, we are influenced by personality theories of conservatism, but we find them most useful for identifying
needs and motivations that may be temporarily as well as chronically accessible. This opens the door to situationalist, social
psychological theorizing and research on the manifestations of
political conservatism.
Past research and theory on conservatism in sociology, economics, and political science has often assumed that people adopt
conservative ideologies out of self-interest (see Sears & Funk,
1991). This account fits well with data indicating increased conservatism among upper-class elites (e.g., Centers, 1949; Sidanius
& Ekehammar, 1979). Although we grant that self-interest is one
among many motives that are capable of influencing political
attitudes and behavior, our review requires a reexamination of this
issue. Specifically, many of the theories we integrate suggest that
1
Rokeach (1960) advanced a similar argument concerning the match
between cognitive structure and ideological content:

We thus see in the case of fascism that ideological content and
structure support each other. There is no incompatibility between
them and thus psychological conflict is not engendered or guilt
feelings aroused. For this reason, authoritarian ideological structures
may be psychologically more reconcilable—more easily “attachable”—to ideologies that are antidemocratic than to those that are
democratic in content. If a person’s underlying motivations are served
by forming a closed belief system, then it is more than likely that his
motivations can also be served by embracing an ideology that is
blatantly anti-equalitarian. If this is so, it would account for the
somewhat greater affinity we have observed between authoritarian
belief structure and conservatism than between the same belief structure and liberalism. (p. 127)

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

342

motives to overcome fear, threat, and uncertainty may be associated with increased conservatism, and some of these motives
should be more pronounced among members of disadvantaged and
low-status groups. As a result, the disadvantaged might embrace
right-wing ideologies under some circumstances to reduce fear,
anxiety, dissonance, uncertainty, or instability (e.g., Jost, Pelham,
Sheldon, & Sullivan, 2003; Lane, 1962; Nias, 1973), whereas the
advantaged might gravitate toward conservatism for reasons of
self-interest or social dominance (e.g., Centers, 1949; Sidanius &
Ekehammar, 1979; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999).
A motivated–social cognitive perspective also defies relatively
straightforward theories of imitation and social learning, which
assume that people are conservative because their parents (or other
agents of influence) modeled conservative attitudes or behaviors.
Correlations between the political attitudes of parents and their
offspring generally attain statistical significance, but they leave the
majority of variance unexplained (e.g., Altemeyer, 1988; Sears,
1983; Sidanius & Ekehammar, 1979; Sulloway, 1996). We do not
deny that personality goals, rational self-interest, and social learning are important factors that drive conservatism, but our perspective stresses that politically conservative orientations are multiply
determined by a wide variety of factors that vary personally and
situationally. We argue that conservatism as a belief system is a
function of many different kinds of variables, but that a matching
relationship holds between certain kinds of psychological motives
and specific ideological outcomes. Thus, the general assumptions
of our motivated social– cognitive perspective may be applied
usefully to the analysis of any coherent belief system (irrespective
of content), but the specific array of epistemic, existential, and
ideological motives that we review in this article uniquely characterizes political conservatism as a system of interrelated beliefs.

The Ideology of Conservatism
The ideology of conservatism has long served as subject matter
for historians (e.g., Diamond, 1995; Kolko, 1963), journalists (e.g.,
Lind, 1996; I. F. Stone, 1989), political scientists (e.g., Carmines
& Berkman, 1994; Conover & Feldman, 1981; Huntington, 1957;
McClosky & Zaller, 1984), sociologists (e.g., Anderson, Zelditch,
Takagi, & Whiteside, 1965; Danigelis & Cutler, 1991; Lo &
Schwartz, 1998; Mannheim, 1927/1986, 1936; A. S. Miller, 1994),
and philosophers (e.g., Eagleton, 1991; Habermas, 1989; Rorty,
1989). Our goal in the present article is to summon the unique
analytical powers drawn from a variety of psychological theories
of motivated social cognition to shed light on the anatomy of
conservatism. Following Abric (2001), we argue that political
conservatism, like many other complex social representations, has
both a stable definitional core and a set of more malleable, historically changing peripheral associations (what Huntington,
1957, referred to as secondary issues). It is the ideological core of
political conservatism (more than its peripheral aspects) that we
hypothesize to be linked to specific social, cognitive, and motivational needs.2

Conceptual Definitions
Core aspects of conservative ideology. Dictionary definitions
of conservatism stress “the disposition and tendency to preserve
what is established; opposition to change” (Neilson, 1958, p. 568)
and “the disposition in politics to maintain the existing order”

(Morris, 1976, p. 312). Traditionalism and hostility to social innovation were central to Mannheim’s (1927/1986) sociological
analysis of conservatism. Rossiter (1968), too, defined situational
conservatism in the International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences as “an attitude of opposition to disruptive change in the
social, economic, legal, religious, political, or cultural order” (p.
291).3 He added, “The distinguishing mark of this conservatism, as
indeed it is of any brand of conservatism, is the fear of change
[italics added], which becomes transformed in the political arena
into the fear of radicalism” (p. 291). Consistent with this notion,
Conover and Feldman (1981) found that the primary basis for
self-definitions of liberals and conservatives has to do with acceptance of, versus resistance to, change (see also Huntington, 1957).
This dimension of conservatism is captured especially well by
Wilson and Patterson’s (1968) C-Scale and by Altemeyer’s (1996,
1998) RWA Scale.
A second core issue concerns preferences for inequality. As
Giddens (1998), following Bobbio (1996), wrote, “One major
criterion continually reappears in distinguishing left from right:
attitudes toward equality [italics added]. The left favours greater
equality, while the right sees society as inevitably hierarchical” (p.
40). This characterization is consistent with many historical and
political definitions of conservative and right-wing ideology (Muller, 2001), and it is also reflected in several scales used to measure
conservatism (Knight, 1999). Specifically, measures of political–
economic conservatism (Sidanius & Ekehammar, 1979), SDO
(Pratto, Sidanius, Stallworth, & Malle, 1994), and economic system justification (Jost & Thompson, 2000) all focus on attitudes
toward equality.
Relations between resistance to change and acceptance of inequality. Although we believe that the two core dimensions of
political conservatism—resistance to change and acceptance of
inequality—are often related to one another, they are obviously
distinguishable. Vivid counterexamples come to mind in which the
two dimensions are negatively related to one another. For instance,
there is the “conservative paradox” of right-wing revolutionaries,
such as Hitler or Mussolini or Pinochet, who seem to advocate
2

Social scientists have debated for years whether political ideology
exists at all as a coherent, internally consistent system of beliefs in the
minds of individuals (e.g., Converse, 1964; Judd, Krosnick, & Milburn,
1981; Kerlinger, 1984; McGuire, 1985). Granting that ideologies—like
other attitudes—possess a high degree of malleability, we argue that it is
still worthwhile to consider the psychological characteristics of conservative thought. Specifically, we propose that one might distinguish between
a relatively stable ideological core of conservatism comprised of resistance
to change and acceptance of inequality (e.g., Giddens, 1998; Huntington,
1957; Mannheim, 1927/1986; Rossiter, 1968) and more ideologically peripheral issues (such as school busing or gun control) that are likely to vary
considerably in their ideological relevance across time. Because the conservative core may be grounded in powerful and relatively stable individual
needs, it may persist as a deep personality structure, the surface manifestations of which might change with the tides of social and political debate.
3
In the most recent edition of the International Encyclopedia of the
Social Sciences, Muller’s (2001) definition of conservatism similarly
stresses resistance to change (as well as belief in the legitimacy of inequality). He observed: “For conservatives, the historical survival of an institution or practice— be it marriage, monarchy, or the market— creates a prima
facie case that it has served some need” (p. 2625). That is, what conservatives share is a tendency to rationalize existing institutions, especially
those that maintain hierarchical authority.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

social change in the direction of decreased egalitarianism. In at
least some of these cases, what appears to be a desire for change
is really “an imaginatively transfigured conception of the past with
which to criticize the present” (Muller, 2001, p. 2625). There are
also cases of left-wing ideologues who, once they are in power,
steadfastly resist change, allegedly in the name of egalitarianism,
such as Stalin or Khrushchev or Castro (see J. Martin, Scully, &
Levitt, 1990). It is reasonable to suggest that some of these
historical figures may be considered politically conservative, at
least in the context of the systems they defended.4
In any case, we are not denying that liberals can be rigid
defenders of the status quo or that conservatives can support
change. We assume that historical and cultural variation in political systems affects both the meaning of conservatism and the
strength of empirical associations between the psychological and
ideological variables we investigate. To take one fairly obvious
example, it seems likely that many left-wingers in totalitarian
communist regimes would exhibit mental rigidity and other psychological characteristics that are often thought to be associated
with right-wingers in other contexts. To be sure, social scientists in
the West have undersampled these populations in developing and
assessing their theories.
Despite dramatic exceptions, the two core aspects of conservatism are generally psychologically related to one another for most
of the people most of the time (Muller, 2001). In part, this is
because of the historical fact that traditional social arrangements
have generally been more hierarchical and less egalitarian compared with nontraditional arrangements. Therefore, to resist
change in general has often meant resisting increased efforts at
egalitarianism; conversely, to preserve the status quo has typically
entailed entrusting the present and future to the same authorities
who have controlled the past. Accordingly, several common measures of political conservatism include items gauging both resistance to change and endorsement of inequality (see Knight, 1999;
Sidanius, 1978, 1985; Wilson, 1973c). As most Western societies
have passed through the various major revolutions and reform
movements that have characterized the period since the Middle
Ages, the strength of the connection between resistance to change
and opposition to equality has weakened (see also Sulloway,
1996). In a hypothetical world of complete equality, it is quite
plausible that the two dimensions would be uncorrelated and that
conservatives would fear changes that would reduce equality.
These observations underscore the importance of investigating
our hypotheses in as many different national and cultural contexts
as possible, including cultures in which the status quo is relatively
egalitarian and/or left-wing. Examples involving socialist or communist countries make clear that resistance to change and antiegalitarianism are independent constructs in principle, even if they
tend to be (imperfectly) correlated in most cases. Such political
contexts offer the best opportunities to determine whether our
specific epistemic, existential, and ideological motives are associated with allegiance to the status quo (whether left-wing or rightwing) or whether they are associated with right-wing attitudes in
particular. Unfortunately, little or no empirical data are available
from the major communist or formerly communist countries such
as China, Russia, and Cuba. Nevertheless, we have made a special
effort to seek out and incorporate results obtained in 12 different
countries, including those with historical influences of socialism or
communism, including Sweden (Sidanius, 1978, 1985), Poland
(Golec, 2001), East Germany (Fay & Frese, 2000), West Germany

343

(Kemmelmeier, 1997), Italy (Chirumbolo, 2002), England (Kirton,
1978; Kohn, 1974; Nias, 1973; Rokeach, 1960; Smithers & Lobley, 1978; Tetlock, 1984), Canada (Altemeyer, 1998), and Israel
(Fibert & Ressler, 1998; Florian, Mikulincer, & Hirschberger,
2001). As we reveal below, the empirical results from these
countries are not generally different from those obtained in other
national contexts.
Peripheral aspects of conservative ideology. Historically, conservatism as an ideological belief system has embodied many
things, including the desire for order and stability, preference for
gradual rather than revolutionary change (if any), adherence to
preexisting social norms, idealization of authority figures, punishment of deviants, and endorsement of social and economic inequality (e.g., Eckhardt, 1991; Eysenck & Wilson, 1978; Kerlinger, 1984; Lentz, 1939; Mannheim, 1927/1986; McClosky &
Zaller, 1984; Sidanius et al., 1996; W. F. Stone & Schaffner, 1988;
Tomkins, 1963; Wilson, 1973c). Some of these preferences are
directly related to the core aspects of ideology, whereas others are
not. The fact that conservatism stands for so many different goals
and affects so many areas of life means that people who are
motivated to uphold conservative ideals are sometimes faced with
perplexing dilemmas. The degree of complexity involved in the
ideological label of conservatism not only gives George F. Will
(1998) a migraine from time to time, as the opening quotation of
this article suggests, but it also makes the concept of conservatism
a particularly difficult one to define and to study with the methods
of social science (Muller, 2001). Matters are made even more
complicated by the fact that historical and cultural factors change
the manifestations of conservatism. For instance, conservatism in
the United States during the 1960s entailed support for the Vietnam War and opposition to civil rights, whereas conservatism in
the 1990s had more to do with being tough on crime and supporting traditional moral and religious values (A. S. Miller, 1994). In
post-fascist Europe, conservatives have emphasized their opposition to communism, economic redistribution, and the growth of the
welfare state (Muller, 2001). But even in the context of historical
and cultural variation, there is some utility in identifying major
social and psychological factors that are associated with core
values of ideological conservatism, as Mannheim (1927/1986) and
many others have argued.5
4
The clearest example seems to be Stalin, who secretly admired Hitler
and identified with several right-wing causes (including anti-Semitism). In
the Soviet context, Stalin was almost certainly to the right of his political
rivals, most notably Trotsky. In terms of his psychological makeup as well,
Stalin appears to have had much in common with right-wing extremists
(see, e.g., Birt, 1993; Bullock, 1993; Robins & Post, 1997).
5
Our motivated social– cognitive perspective also recognizes that people
might occasionally adopt conservative ideologies for reasons having little
if anything to do with either acceptance of change or support for inequality.
For instance, they may be motivated by (conscious or unconscious) attempts to secure the approval of conservative parents, acceptance by
conservative peers, or the trust of conservative superiors. In addition,
people may be drawn (e.g., by perceived self-interest) to accept peripheral
elements of a conservative ideology (e.g., related to such issues as racial
integration, school busing, or taxation) and eventually accept other elements of the ideology because of their association with likeminded others
who share their position on local issues and also endorse core conservative
positions (related to resistance to change and acceptance of inequality).

344

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Operational Definitions
The biggest conceptual challenge we faced in reviewing the
research literature was in clearly distinguishing between psychological independent variables and political dependent variables.
Many available measures of conservatism confound the two types
of variables, making it difficult to assess the hypothesis that a
given set of psychological motives is associated with right-wing
political attitudes. The dependent variables we have selected for
review (a) are intended as measures of social and political attitudes
rather than general psychological tendencies that are content free,
(b) tap right-wing or politically conservative attitudes rather than
extreme ideological opinions in general, (c) reflect methodological
diversity to increase generalizability of meta-analytic results, and
(d) correspond relatively well to core and, to a lesser extent,
peripheral aspects of conservative ideology, as outlined above.
Applying these criteria, we were able to identify studies using 88
different samples that used direct measures of political identification, conservative ideological opinion, resistance to social and
political change, and/or preference for social and economic inequality. The methodological properties of several of these scales
were reviewed by Knight (1999) as measures of right-wing conservatism (as contrasted with liberalism, radicalism, and left-wing
ideology).
Measures stressing resistance to change. Consistent with our
conceptual definition of political conservatism, many of the studies
in our review used measures that emphasized the dimension of
resistance to change. Wilson and Patterson’s (1968) C-Scale and
Altemeyer’s (1988, 1996, 1998) RWA Scale address several core
and peripheral aspects of conservative ideology, but the primary
focus of each is on resistance to change. The C-Scale measures the
favorability of attitudes toward each of 50 items, including some
that pertain to social change (mixed marriage, Sabbath observance,
the theory of evolution, modern art, royalty) others that pertain to
maintaining inequality (White superiority, socialism, women
judges, apartheid), and still others that are peripheral (at best) to
the core meaning of political conservatism (birth control, suicide,
jazz music, divorce). At least three of Wilson’s (1973a, p. 51)
seven major dimensions of conservatism directly measure attitudes
toward stability versus change (preference for conventional attitudes and institutions, religious dogmatism, resistance to scientific
progress), so it is probably best thought of as a conservatism scale
that stresses resistance to social and political change.
Although the construct of authoritarianism was originally used
by Adorno et al. (1950) to deal primarily with attitudes toward
minority groups (and therefore attitudes about social inequality),
Altemeyer’s (1998) RWA Scale largely emphasizes resistance to
change. Items include the following: “Authorities such as parents
and our national leaders generally turn out to be right about things,
and the radicals and protestors are almost always wrong”; “Some
young people get rebellious ideas, but as they get older they ought
to become more mature and forget such things”; and “Some of the
worst people in our country nowadays are those who do not respect
our flag, our leaders, and the normal way things are supposed to be
done.” Thus, the RWA Scale largely measures ideological commitment to tradition, authority, and social convention against
threats of change, protest, and political rebellion (Altemeyer, 1981,
1988, 1996, 1998).
One or both of these two instruments (the C-Scale or the RWA
Scale) was administered to 31 (or 35%) of the 88 samples included

in our review. An additional 3 samples received conceptually
related measures of authoritarianism versus rebelliousness (Kohn,
1974), conservatism–radicalism (Smithers & Lobley, 1978), and
authoritarian conservatism (Fay & Frese, 2000), bringing the total
to 39% of the samples.
Measures stressing acceptance of inequality. A number of
additional instruments used to measure right-wing political ideology (the Fascism Scale [F-Scale], the SDO Scale, the Economic
System Justification Scale, and measures of general and economic
conservatism) focus as much or more on attitudes toward inequality than on resistance to change. (Of course, in most societies,
some degree of inequality is the status quo.) The F-Scale, for
instance, measures right-wing derogation of low-status minority
groups (Adorno et al., 1950), and the SDO Scale measures groupbased dominance and generalized opposition to inequality (see Jost
& Thompson, 2000; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). Jost and Thompson’s (2000) Economic System Justification Scale and Golec’s
(2001) Economic Conservatism Scale both tap the belief that large
differences in income are legitimate and necessary for society.
Sidanius’s (1978, 1985) General Conservatism Scale includes attitude referents focusing on acceptance versus rejection of a number of changes relating to the degree of inequality in society
(increased taxation of the rich, increased aid to the poor, greater
equality in salaries, a female president of the United States, racial
equality). These scales were administered to 26 (or 30%) of the
samples included in our review.
Measures stressing political identification and issue-based conservatism. Some studies we review measured self-reported political orientation directly (Chirumbolo, 2002; Fibert & Ressler,
1998; Golec, 2001; Jost et al., 1999; Kemmelmeier, 1997; Tetlock,
1984), and others measured conservative voting records (Gruenfeld, 1995; McCann, 1997; Tetlock, 1983; Tetlock, Bernzweig, &
Gallant, 1985). Still others addressed specific issues that are related to the periphery but not necessarily to the core of political
conservatism, including attitudes and behavioral decisions related
to the death penalty, severity of punishment for criminals, funding
for the police department, and conversion to authoritarian churches
(Florian et al., 2001; Jost et al., 1999; Rosenblatt, Greenberg,
Solomon, Pyszczynski, & Lyon, 1989; Sales, 1972, 1973). The
Political–Economic Conservatism Scale used by Rokeach (1960)
and Sidanius (1978) tapped attitudes toward the specific issue of
government control of industry, labor, and capitalism. In total,
these measures were administered to 37 (or 42%) of the samples in
our review.

Theories Relating to the Psychology of Conservatism
The most general form of the hypothesis that we investigate in
this article is that there are observable empirical regularities that
link specific psychological motives and processes (as independent
variables) to particular ideological or political contents (as dependent variables). Many different theoretical accounts of conservatism have stressed the motivational underpinnings of conservative
thought, but they have identified different needs as critical. Our
review brings these diverse accounts together for the first time and
integrates them. Specific variables that have been hypothesized to
predict conservatism include fear and aggression (Adorno et al.,
1950; Altemeyer, 1998), intolerance of ambiguity (Fibert &
Ressler, 1998; Frenkel-Brunswik, 1949), rule following and negative affect (Tomkins, 1963, 1965), uncertainty avoidance (Sor-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

rentino & Roney, 1986; Wilson, 1973b), need for cognitive closure
(Kruglanski & Webster, 1996), personal need for structure (Altemeyer, 1998; Schaller, Boyd, Yohannes, & O’Brien, 1995; Smith
& Gordon, 1998), need for prevention-oriented regulatory focus
(Higgins, 1997; Liberman et al., 1999), anxiety arising from mortality salience (Greenberg et al., 1990, 1992), group-based dominance (Pratto et al., 1994; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999), and system
justification tendencies (Jost & Banaji, 1994; Jost, Burgess, &
Mosso, 2001). In what follows, we summarize major theoretical
perspectives and use them to generate a comprehensive list of
motives that are potential predictors of political conservatism. We
first describe the theories and then, because many of them postulate similar motives, we review the cumulative evidence for and
against each of the motives all at once.
We review several major theories that may be used to illustrate
linkages between motivational and cognitive processes and social
and political contents. These theories may be classified into three
major categories: (a) theories of personality and individual differences, (b) theories stressing the satisfaction of epistemic and
existential needs, and (c) sociopolitical theories regarding the
rationalization of social systems. Taken individually, no single
theory provides an adequate conceptualization of conservatism in
all of its forms. By unifying these diverse theoretical perspectives,
it becomes clearer that conservatism results from the intersection
of social, cognitive, and motivational factors.

Personality and Individual-Difference Theories
of Conservatism
The tradition of research on the personality correlates of political conservatives began with Adorno et al. (1950) and has thrived
right up until the present day (e.g., Altemeyer, 1998; W. F. Stone
et al., 1993). Although personality theories do not explicitly regard
political conservatism to be a special case of motivated social
cognition, the insights and findings garnered from these perspectives are consistent with the message we present, mainly because
such theories have stressed the motivated character of personality
and individual differences. Our hope is that by combining the
insights gained from these personality theories with the experimental methods favored by researchers of motivated social cognition, future work will be in a better position to directly investigate
the motivated and dynamic aspects of political conservatism.

The Theory of RWA
As intellectual descendants of the Frankfurt School, the authors
of The Authoritarian Personality (Adorno et al., 1950) sought to
integrate Marxist theories of ideology and social structure with
Freudian theories of motivation and personality development to
explain the rise of fascism throughout Europe in the 1930s and
1940s. Specifically, they proposed that harsh parenting styles
brought on by economic hardship led entire generations to repress
hostility toward authority figures and to replace it with an exaggerated deference and idealization of authority and tendencies to
blame societal scapegoats and punish deviants (see also Reich,
1946/1970). The theory of authoritarianism holds that fear and
aggressiveness resulting from parental punitiveness motivate individuals to seek predictability and control in their environments.
Authoritarian attitudes, which may be elicited by situational
threats, combine an anxious veneration of authority and conven-

345

tion with a vindictiveness toward subordinates and deviants (Altemeyer, 1998; Fromm, 1941; Peterson, Doty, & Winter, 1993;
W. F. Stone et al., 1993). Authoritarianism is often taken to be
synonymous with conservatism, but Wilson, theorizing that conservatism is the general factor underlying all social attitudes (Wilson, 1973b; Wilson & Patterson, 1968), contended that authoritarianism is but one manifestation of the more general factor of
conservatism (Wilson, 1968).
An exhaustive effort to update theory and research on authoritarianism and to respond to various conceptual, methodological,
and statistical objections has been undertaken by Altemeyer (1981,
1988, 1996, 1998). Altemeyer’s (1981) model presents a more
methodologically sophisticated and statistically robust approach to
measuring and conceptualizing authoritarianism, distinguishing it
from various response sets associated with acquiescence, and he
rejects orthodox Freudian interpretations of the syndrome. Altemeyer’s (1981) RWA is characterized by (a) “a high degree of
submission to the authorities who are perceived to be established
and legitimate”; (b) “a general aggressiveness, directed against
various persons, which is perceived to be sanctioned by established
authorities”; and (c) “a high degree of adherence to the social
conventions which are perceived to be endorsed by society” (p.
148). This reconceptualization, which combines resistance to
change and endorsement of inequality, is consistent with two
newly emerging theories, social dominance theory (Pratto et al.,
1994; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999) and system justification theory
(Jost & Banaji, 1994; Jost et al., 2003), both of which are discussed
below.
Scores on the RWA Scale have been found to predict a broad
range of attitudes and behaviors related to social, economic, and
political conservatism as defined in the general culture at the time.
For instance, the scale has correlated reliably with political party
affiliation; reactions to Watergate; pro-capitalist attitudes; severity
of jury sentencing decisions; punishment of deviants; racial prejudice; homophobia; religious orthodoxy; victim blaming; and acceptance of covert governmental activities such as illegal bugging,
political harassment, denial of the right to assemble, and illegal
drug raids (Altemeyer, 1981, 1988, 1996, 1998). Peterson et al.
(1993) reported correlational evidence linking authoritarianism to
a wide variety of conservative attitudes, including opposition to
environmentalism, abortion rights, diversity on university campuses, and services for AIDS patients and homeless people. Ray
(1973), in questioning the discriminant validity of RWA, reported
a correlation of .81 between the RWA Scale and his own conservatism scale. Altemeyer (1996, 1998) summarized the results of
several studies of the attitudes of Canadian and U.S. legislators in
which he found strong differences in RWA between conservative
politicians and others and concluded that
High RWA lawmakers also score higher in prejudice, and wish they
could pass laws limiting the freedom of speech, freedom of the press,
the right of assembly, and other freedoms guaranteed in the Bill of
Rights. They want to impose strict limitations on abortion, they favor
capital punishment, and they oppose tougher gun control laws. Finally, politicians answer the RWA Scale with such extraordinary
levels of internal consistency, it appears the scale provides our most
powerful measure of the liberal-conservative dimension in politics.
(Altemeyer, 1998, p. 53)

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

346

Thus, a relatively strong relation has been established between
RWA and political conservatism among political elites as well as
the masses.
Altemeyer’s (1998) work is also important in identifying the
two main directions in which extremely conservative and authoritarian attitudes may lead. First, they may lead to an actively
hostile or dominant approach to dealing with socially sanctioned
scapegoats and devalued out-groups, which is also the primary
focus of social dominance theory (Sidanius & Pratto, 1999; Whitley, 1999). Second, RWA may lead to a more passively submissive
or deferential posture toward authorities, which would make its
subscribers ideal candidates to follow the next Hitler or Mussolini
(Altemeyer, 1998; Fromm, 1941; Reich, 1946/1970). Thus, extreme right-wing attitudes “lock” people into a “dominancesubmissive authoritarian embrace” (Altemeyer, 1998, p. 47), and
the specific manifestation of these attitudes presumably depends
on the social and historical context and the motivations that are
elicited from these contexts.

Intolerance of Ambiguity
Frenkel-Brunswik’s work on intolerance of ambiguity was
closely related to research on the authoritarian personality, but it
was distinctive with regard to methodology and content. In an
abstract published in 1948, she reported a study of ethnic prejudice
involving the attitudes of adults and children (9 to 14 years old).
Frenkel-Brunswik (1948) argued that intolerance of ambiguity
constituted a general personality variable that related positively to
prejudice as well as to more general social and cognitive variables.
As she put it, individuals who are intolerant of ambiguity
are significantly more often given to dichotomous conceptions of the
sex roles, of the parent-child relationship, and of interpersonal relationships in general. They are less permissive and lean toward rigid
categorization of cultural norms. Power–weakness, cleanliness–
dirtiness, morality–immorality, conformance– divergence are the dimensions through which people are seen. . . . There is sensitivity
against qualified as contrasted with unqualified statements and against
perceptual ambiguity; a disinclination to think in terms of probability;
a comparative inability to abandon mental sets in intellectual tasks,
such as in solving mathematical problems, after they have lost their
appropriateness. Relations to home discipline and to the ensuing
attitude towards authority will likewise be demonstrated quantitatively. (Frenkel-Brunswik, 1948, p. 268)

Frenkel-Brunswik (1949, 1951) developed further the theory of
ambiguity intolerance and elaborated the antecedent conditions of
this psychological disposition and its manifold consequences. At
the time, ambiguity intolerance was viewed in Freudian terms as
stemming from an underlying emotional conflict involving feelings of hostility directed at one’s parents combined with idealization tendencies. Although stable individual differences in the intolerance of ambiguity have been observed across many
generations of researchers and participants, theoretical explanations have changed somewhat. Anticipating current perspectives
on uncertainty avoidance (Hofstede, 2001; Sorrentino & Roney,
2000; Wilson, 1973b), Budner (1962), for example, defined intolerance of ambiguity as “the tendency to perceive ambiguous
situations as sources of threat” (p. 29).
Intolerance of ambiguity, by increasing cognitive and motivational tendencies to seek certainty, is hypothesized to lead people
to cling to the familiar, to arrive at premature conclusions, and to

impose simplistic clichés and stereotypes. In a review of research
on ambiguity intolerance, Furnham and Ribchester (1995) provided the following list of consequences of this tendency:
Resistance to reversal of apparent fluctuating stimuli, the early selection and maintenance of one solution in a perceptually ambiguous
situation, inability to allow for the possibility of good and bad traits in
the same person, acceptance of attitude statements representing a
rigid, black-white view of life, seeking for certainty, a rigid dichotomizing into fixed categories, premature closure, and remaining closed
to familiar characteristics of stimuli. (p. 180)

Thus, theories of intolerance of ambiguity combine psychodynamic antecedents with a wide range of perceptual, cognitive,
motivational, social, and political consequences. Arguably, it is
this richness that accounts for the persistence of interest in this
concept over the 50 years since its introduction.

Mental Rigidity, Dogmatism, and Closed-Mindedness
One of the persistent criticisms of Adorno et al.’s (1950) work
on authoritarianism and the F-Scale designed to measure fascistic
potential was that it neglected authoritarianism among left-wingers
(e.g., Shils, 1954). In part to address this concern, Rokeach (1960)
developed a scale of dogmatism that was meant to provide a more
balanced measure of authoritarianism. The scale contained items
tapping double think, which was defined as susceptibility to logically contradictory beliefs and denial of contradictions in one’s
belief system, as well as a narrow future orientation and a strong
orientation toward authority. Rokeach (1960) argued that dogmatism is indicative of closed-mindedness, which he contrasted with
open-mindedness:
All belief-disbelief systems serve two powerful and conflicting sets of
motives at the same time: the need for a cognitive framework to know
and to understand and the need to ward off threatening aspects of
reality. To the extent that the cognitive need to know is predominant
and the need to ward off threat is absent, open systems should
result. . . . But as the need to ward off threat becomes stronger, the
cognitive need to know should become weaker, resulting in more
closed belief systems. (p. 67)

Thus, Rokeach’s theory, like some of its predecessors, combines
elements of epistemic and existential motivation in seeking to
explain social and political attitudes. In another passage, he argued
further that, “if the closed or dogmatic mind is extremely resistant
to change, it may be so not only because it allays anxiety but also
because it satisfies the need to know” (Rokeach, 1960, p. 68).
Rokeach’s theory also seeks to combine cognitive and motivational needs in explaining ideological rigidity. Its influence clearly
extends to contemporary research on the role of cognitive sophistication and integrative complexity in political ideology (e.g.,
Sidanius, 1985, 1988; Tetlock, 1983, 1984).

The Theory of Ideo-Affective Polarity
Several commentators (Abelson & Prentice, 1989; Alexander,
1995; Milburn, 1991; W. F. Stone, 1986; W. F. Stone & Schaffner,
1988; Thomas, 1976) have noted that Silvan Tomkins’s (1963,
1965, 1987, 1995) theory of ideological polarity is one of the most
fascinating accounts of the origins and implications of left-wing
and right-wing thinking, but it is lamentably underresearched. It is
a distinctive theory because it explicitly stresses the role of affect

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

and motivation in ideology and because it assumes that ideological
predilections permeate nearly every domain of a person’s life,
including one’s attitudes toward the arts, music, science, philosophy, and so on, so that “if one knows what an individual believes
about the nature of literature, one would also know what he would
believe about the nature of mathematics” (Tomkins, 1995, p. 117).
According to polarity theory, there exist generalized orientations
(or ideo-affective postures) toward the world that may be regarded
as belonging either to the ideological left or to the right, and they
are associated with liberty and humanism in the first case and rule
following and normative concerns in the second. Those who resonate with left-wing ideologies believe that people are basically
good and that the purpose of society is to facilitate human growth
and experience. By contrast, those who resonate with right-wing
ideologies believe that people are essentially bad and that the
function of society is to set rules and limits to prevent irresponsible
behavior. On these issues, Tomkins’s (1963, 1965, 1987, 1995)
theory bears more than a passing resemblance to the theory of
authoritarianism (e.g., Adorno et al., 1950).
These ideological orientations are multiply determined, according to the theory, but it is clear that one’s preferences are developed early in childhood emotional life; this occurs through the
acquisition of personal scripts, a term that refers to affectively
charged memories of social situations involving the self and important others (Carlson & Brincka, 1987; Tomkins, 1987). For
example, childhood experiences arising from a parental focus on
the child and his or her inner self are expected to reinforce feelings
of excitement, joy, surprise, distress, and shame, in turn leading the
child to gravitate toward the humanistic orientation, or left-wing
perspective. In contrast, more structured, punitive parenting engenders emotions such as anger and contempt, which reflect the
normative orientation, or right-wing perspective (Loye, 1977;
W. F. Stone, 1986; Tomkins, 1963, 1965).
Most of the empirical research relevant to the theory of ideological polarity has used a 59-item Polarity Scale developed by
Tomkins (1964/1988) and updated by W. F. Stone and Schaffner
(1988). Items tapping the right-wing or normative orientation
include the following: “Children should be taught to obey what is
right even though they may not always feel like it” and “If I break
the law I should be punished for the good of society.” Scores on
the Polarity Scale have been found to predict reactions to presidential assassinations (Tomkins, 1995); preferences for individualistic versus sociotropic values (Carlson & Levy, 1970; de St.
Aubin, 1996); attitudes toward war and peace (Eckhardt & Alcock,
1970); assumptions concerning human nature, religiosity, and political orientation (de St. Aubin, 1996; Elms, 1969); and a number
of other affective responses (see W. F. Stone, 1980). The theory is
groundbreaking not only in its attempt to identify affective and
motivational bases of conservatism (related to anger, contempt,
and the desire for punitiveness) but also in its suggestion that a
disproportionate number of conservatives are driven by a motivation to establish and follow rules and norms in a wide variety of
domains inside and outside of politics.

A Dynamic Theory of Conservatism as Uncertainty
Avoidance
Consistent with Tomkins’s (1963, 1965) and others’ emphases
on affective bases of ideology and with the research on intolerance
of ambiguity, Wilson (1973b) proposed a dynamic theory that

347

treats conservatism as the product of (partially unconscious) motives and needs having to do with fear and anxiety. The central
tenet of the theory is that “the common basis for all the various
components of the conservative attitude syndrome is a generalized
susceptibility to experiencing threat or anxiety in the face of
uncertainty” (Wilson, 1973b, p. 259). According to this perspective, conservatism is multiply determined by what Wilson (1973b)
labeled genetic factors, such as anxiety proneness, stimulus aversion, low intelligence, and physical unattractiveness, as well as by
environmental factors such as parental coldness, punitiveness,
rigidity, inconsistency, low social class, and low self-esteem.
Wilson (1973b) hypothesized a great many different sources of
threat or uncertainty, including death, anarchy, foreigners, dissent,
complexity, novelty, ambiguity, and social change. Conservative
attitudinal responses to these sources of uncertainty include superstition, religious dogmatism, ethnocentrism, militarism, authoritarianism, punitiveness, conventionality, and rigid morality. Despite a few recent exceptions (e.g., Fay & Frese, 2000; McAllister
& Anderson, 1991), the theoretical account of conservatism as a
motivated response to environmental uncertainty has been largely
lost in the field of political psychology since the publication of a
volume edited by Wilson (1973c) on that topic. Although Wilson’s
emphasis was clearly on individual differences arising from genetic and environmental influences, his theory targeted the reduction of uncertainty and threat as motives for political conservatism.
Our approach to political conservatism as motivated social cognition seeks to resurrect these fruitful notions and to expand and
elaborate on the ways in which conservative systems of thought
are adopted to meet the epistemic and existential needs of individuals, groups, and social systems.

Epistemic and Existential Need Theories
Although the three theories of cognitive–motivational processes
reviewed here involve recognition (and even assessment) of individual differences—much as theories of personality assume epistemic and existential needs—neither individual differences nor
their developmental roots are accorded central research attention in
these frameworks. Rather, these theories, which are like Wilson’s
(1973b) theory of uncertainty avoidance in other respects, place
particular emphasis on the mutually constitutive role of cognitive
and motivational processes in determining conservative response
tendencies. We turn now to a summary of theories of lay epistemics, regulatory focus, and terror management.

Lay Epistemic Theory
In an effort to unify cognitive and motivational accounts of
behavior, Kruglanski (1989) developed a theory of lay epistemics
whereby knowledge and beliefs are arrived at through a process of
motivated informational search. Knowledge acquisition, according
to this theory, follows a two-step epistemic process of hypothesis
generation and testing (Popper, 1959). Informational factors include the availability and accessibility of various knowledge structures that the individual may use to construct the relevant hypotheses and their testable implications. Often, such constructive
processes can be quite labor intensive and effortful. They may
require considerable mental resources, including cognitive capacity and epistemic motivation. A central motivational construct in
the theory of lay epistemics is the need for cognitive closure,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

348

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

which refers to the expedient desire for any firm belief on a given
topic, as opposed to confusion and uncertainty.
A variety of factors may arouse the need for closure. These have
to do with the perceived benefits and costs of possessing (or
lacking) closure and may vary as a function of the person, the
immediate situation, and the culture (see also Hofstede, 2001). For
example, the benefits of possessing cognitive closure include the
potential affordance of predictability and the guidance of action.
Consistent with the notion that situations lead people to seek out
nonspecific closure, Dittes (1961) found that failure-induced threat
caused research participants to reach “impulsive closure” on an
ambiguous task. More generally, the need for cognitive closure
should be elevated in any situation in which the importance of
action looms large, as under time pressure (e.g., Jost et al., 1999;
Kruglanski & Freund, 1983; Shah, Kruglanski, & Thompson,
1998), ambient noise (Kruglanski & Webster, 1996), mental fatigue (D. M. Webster, Richter, & Kruglanski, 1996), or alcohol
intoxication (D. M. Webster, 1994), because such states render
sustained information processing to be subjectively costly.
Building on research devoted to uncertainty orientation (e.g.,
Sorrentino & Roney, 1986, 2000) and the personal need for structure (e.g., Schaller et al., 1995), D. M. Webster and Kruglanski
(1994) developed and validated an individual-difference measure
of the need for cognitive closure, the Need for Closure Scale
(NFCS). This 42-item scale comprises five factors or subscales,
respectively described as (a) preference for order and structure, (b)
emotional discomfort associated with ambiguity, (c) impatience
and impulsivity with regard to decision making, (d) desire for
security and predictability, (e) closed-mindedness. Some illustrative items of this scale are “I think that having clear rules and order
at work is essential for success,”; “I’d rather know bad news than
stay in a state of uncertainty”; “I usually make important decisions
quickly and confidently”; “I don’t like to go into a situation
without knowing what I can expect from it”; and “I do not usually
consult many different opinions before forming my own view.”
Whether evoked situationally or measured as a stable personality dimension, the need for closure has been found to produce the
same consequences. Specifically, it fosters the tendency to seize on
information that affords closure and to freeze on closure once it has
been attained. The need for closure, whether varied situationally or
measured dispositionally, has been associated with tendencies to
engage in social stereotyping (Kruglanski & Freund, 1983), to
succumb to primacy effects in impression formation (Kruglanski
& Freund, 1983; D. M. Webster & Kruglanski, 1994), to exhibit
correspondence bias in attitude attribution (D. M. Webster, 1993),
to resist persuasive influence (Kruglanski, Webster, & Klem,
1993), and to reject opinion deviates (Kruglanski & Webster,
1991). If the theory of lay epistemics is correct, there are situational and dispositional factors that may encourage a general
cognitive–motivational orientation toward the social world that is
either open and exploratory or closed and immutable (Kruglanski
& Webster, 1996).
To understand the hypothesized relation between need for closure and political conservatism (see also Golec, 2001; Jost et al.,
1999), it is important to draw a distinction between the process of
resisting change in general and the specific contents of and/or
direction of the change. On one hand, the need for closure suggests
a perpetuation of the reigning ideology, whatever its contents.
Thus, increasing the need for closure among people whose accessible ideological positions are conservative would result in a

stronger relation between need for closure and conservatism. Likewise, increasing the need for closure among people whose accessible ideological positions are liberal would result in a strengthened relation between need for closure and liberalism. In this
sense, the lay epistemic theory supports the contention that rigidity
of ideological attitudes may be associated with different ideological contents and is not necessarily restricted to right-wing conservatism (Rokeach, 1960).
On the other hand, persons with a high (vs. low) need for closure
are hardly indifferent to ideological contents. Specifically, contents that promise or support epistemic stability, clarity, order, and
uniformity should be preferred by high-need-for-closure persons
over contents that promise their epistemic opposites (i.e., instability, ambiguity, chaos, and diversity). In this sense, a need for
closure that is impartial or nonspecific (i.e., content free) becomes
partial or specific with regard to contents that are explicitly related
to closure (Kruglanski, 1989). To the extent that there is a match
between the need for closure and certain politically conservative
attitudinal contents, then conservative attitudes should be generally
preferred by people who have a high need for closure (Jost et al.,
1999).

Regulatory Focus Theory
Higgins (1997, 1998) proposed a regulatory focus theory that is
pertinent to the psychology of conservatism. This theory distinguishes between two categories of desired goals, namely those
related to advancement, growth, and aspirations (ideals) and those
related to safety, security, and responsibilities (oughts). Distinct
regulatory systems are presumed to address these two classes of
goals. The promotion system reflects individuals’ self-regulation
in relation to their hopes and aspirations (ideals), and it gratifies
nurturance needs. The goal of the promotion system is accomplishment. By contrast, the prevention system reflects self-regulation in
relation to one’s duties and obligations (oughts), and the goal of
this system is safety. According to this theory, a parenting history
of protection focusing on the avoidance of negative outcomes
combined with the exercise of punishment as a disciplinary tool
produces a strong prevention focus as a stable individual orientation. A parenting style of encouraging accomplishments by focusing on achieving positive outcomes and withdrawing love as a
form of discipline produces a strong promotion focus as a stable
individual orientation.
It is also plausible that an emphasis on prevention (vs. promotion) induces a heightened need for cognitive closure as one
consequence of the craving for a secure and comprehensible reality. Like the theory of lay epistemics, regulatory focus theory
leaves open the possibility of anchoring disproportionately on
left-wing ideas (to the extent that a leftist ideology constitutes the
status quo), but at the same time, the theory suggests a general
preference by prevention-oriented, versus promotion-oriented, individuals for conservative over liberal ideologies, all else being
equal. Finally, like the theory of lay epistemics, regulatory focus
theory allows for situational as well as personality factors to drive
the inclination toward conservatism.
Regulatory focus, then, has fairly obvious implications for individuals’ attitudes toward stability and change, and perhaps even
for left- versus right-wing preferences. Specifically, the promotion
goals of accomplishment and advancement should naturally introduce a preference for change over stability, insofar as advancement

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

requires change. The prevention goals of safety and security, on
the other hand, should favor stability over change, to the extent
that stability entails predictability and hence psychological security and control. In signal-detection terms, a promotion focus is
concerned with obtaining hits and avoiding misses, whereas a
prevention focus is concerned with obtaining correct rejections
and avoiding false alarms. Any change has the potential benefit of
providing an opportunity for advancement and accomplishment (a
hit) but has the potential cost of introducing an error of commission. Because such an error is of relatively low concern to persons
with a promotion focus, they should be relatively open to change.
By contrast, stability has the potential benefit of safety and security
(a correct rejection) but has the potential cost of introducing an
error of omission, which is of lesser concern to individuals with a
prevention focus who, therefore, should be resistant to change. To
the extent that political conservatism is motivated, at least in part,
by the desire for security and stability and the avoidance of threat
and change, situations inducing a prevention-oriented regulatory
focus might also induce a conservative shift in the general
population.

Terror Management Theory
A novel theoretical perspective suggests that conservative
thoughts and behaviors may arise from motivations to make sense
of the world and cope with existential crises inherent in the human
experience. Terror management theory (Greenberg, Pyszczynski,
& Solomon, 1986; Greenberg et al., 1990; Rosenblatt et al., 1989)
posits that cultures and their attendant worldviews serve to buffer
anxiety (and prevent terror) arising from the thoughts humans
invariably have about their own mortality. According to terror
management theory, which builds on the work of Ernest Becker
(1973) and others, the denial of death is so prevalent that cultural
institutions evolve as a way of coping with existential anxiety and
human mortality. In this context, it is also worth noting that Wilson
(1973d) listed fear of death as one of the threatening factors that
might be associated with political conservatism.
Terror management theory holds that cultural worldviews or
systems of meaning (e.g., religion) provide people with the means
to transcend death, if only symbolically. The cornerstone of this
position is that awareness of mortality, when combined with an
instinct for self-preservation, creates in humans the capacity to be
virtually paralyzed with fear (Arndt, Greenberg, Solomon, Pyszczynski, & Simon, 1997). Fear of death, in turn, engenders a
defense of one’s cultural worldview. Consequently, the theory
predicts that if the salience of one’s mortality is raised, the worldview will be more heavily endorsed to buffer the resulting anxiety
(Greenberg et al., 1990; Rosenblatt et al., 1989). Under conditions
of heightened mortality salience, defense and justification of the
worldview should be intensified, thereby decreasing tolerance of
opposing views and social, cultural, and political alternatives.
The relevance of terror management theory to the psychology of
conservatism should be apparent. When confronted with thoughts
of their own mortality (Greenberg et al., 1990; Rosenblatt et al.,
1989), people appear to behave more conservatively by shunning
and even punishing outsiders and those who threaten the status of
cherished worldviews. This perspective is especially consistent
with the notion of conservatism as motivated social cognition;
terror management theory holds that social intolerance is the
consequence of worldview-enhancing cognitions motivated by the

349

need to buffer anxiety-inducing thoughts. It should be noted,
however, that Greenberg et al. (1992) argued against a necessary
relation between mortality salience and political conservatism.
Acknowledging that most of the demonstrated effects of mortality
salience have had a politically conservative or intolerant flavor,
they nevertheless claimed that thoughts about death lead only to a
defense of dominant values and that such values could be liberal or
even, paradoxically, tolerant.

Ideological Theories of Individual and
Collective Rationalization
The theories we review next differ somewhat from the
cognitive–motivational process frameworks considered above.
Whereas the cognitive–motivational theories focus on the individual and treat conservatism and related phenomena more or less
exclusively as manifestations of epistemic and existential mechanisms, sociopolitical theories focus on the societal system and the
ideological (as well as psychological) functions that political conservatism might fulfill. Theories of social dominance and system
justification are useful not only for expanding the range of motives
under consideration but also for clarifying the nature of the connection between political conservatism and racism, sexism, and
ethnocentric intolerance (e.g., Altemeyer, 1998; Bahr & Chadwick, 1974; Jost & Banaji, 1994; Jost et al., 2001; Mercer &
Cairns, 1981; Pratto, 1999; Sidanius et al., 1996; Whitley, 1999).

Social Dominance Theory
Unlike theories that seek to explain conservatism with reference
to affective differences arising from parenting styles or childhood
socialization, social dominance theory emphasizes evolutionary
and societal factors as determinants of politically conservative (or
“hierarchy-enhancing”) orientations. According to social dominance theory, human societies strive to minimize group conflict by
developing ideological belief systems that justify the hegemony of
some groups over others (Pratto, 1999; Pratto et al., 1994; Sidanius, 1993; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999; Sidanius et al., 1996). This is
achieved through the promulgation of various “legitimizing
myths” such as the following: (a) “paternalistic myths,” which
assert that dominant groups are needed to lead and take care of
subordinate groups, who are incapable of leading and taking care
of themselves; (b) “reciprocal myths,” which claim that a symbiotic relationship exists between dominant and subordinate groups
and that both groups help each other; and (c) “sacred myths,”
which allege that positions of dominance and subordination are
determined by God or some other divine right (see Sidanius, 1993,
pp. 207–209). Ideological devices such as these are inherently
conservative in content because they seek to preserve existing
hierarchies of status, power, and wealth and to prevent qualitative
social change (e.g., Sidanius & Pratto, 1999).
Social dominance theory holds that attitudes pertaining to social
dominance are determined jointly by biology and socialization and
that there are important individual differences among people with
regard to SDO (e.g., Pratto et al., 1994; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999).
Items from the SDO Scale tap agreement or disagreement with
statements such as the following: “Some people are just more
worthy than others”; “It is not a problem if some people have more
of a chance in life”; and “This country would be better off if we
cared less about how equal all people are.” Thus, the SDO Scale

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

350

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

measures individual differences with respect to the motivated
tendency to preserve the dominance of high-status groups such as
men (rather than women), Whites (rather than Blacks and other
ethnic minorities), and upper-class elites (rather than the working
class). Jost and Thompson (2000) demonstrated that the SDO
Scale is composed of two correlated factors or subscales, namely
the desire for group-based dominance and opposition to equality.
Although social dominance motives are said to be universal (e.g.,
Sidanius & Pratto, 1993), their strength differs considerably across
groups and individuals (e.g., Jost & Thompson, 2000; Pratto, 1999;
Pratto et al., 1994).
Correlations between SDO scores and those of conventional
measures of political and economic conservatism average approximately .30 in a variety of national and cultural contexts (Altemeyer, 1998; Pratto, 1999; Pratto et al., 1994; Sidanius et al., 1996;
Whitley & Lee, 2000). Scores on the scale have been found also to
correlate reliably with identification with the Republican party,
nationalism, cultural elitism, anti-Black racism, sexism, RWA, and
the belief in a just world (Altemeyer, 1998; Pratto et al., 1994).
The scale predicts policy attitudes that are supportive of “law and
order,” military spending, and capital punishment, as well as
attitudes that are unsupportive of women’s rights, racial equality,
affirmative action, gay and lesbian rights, and environmental action (see Jost & Thompson, 2000; Pratto et al., 1994). It is of
theoretical interest that, in addition to the notion of legitimizing the
status quo, social dominance theory also implies the notion that
increasing the degree of hierarchy or group dominance is a motivationally appealing ideological goal at least under some circumstances, such as when one belongs to a high-status group (Altemeyer, 1998; Pratto, 1999; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999).
In a very useful discussion, Altemeyer (1998) distinguished
between the motivational bases of RWA and SDO. He argued that
RWA best accounts for passive deference or submission to authoritarian or fascist leaders—including the tendency to “trust unworthy people who tell them what they want to hear” (Altemeyer,
1998, p. 87), whereas SDO best accounts for more active attempts
to punish or humiliate derogated out-group members, that is, the
desire to “become the alpha animal” (Altemeyer, 1998, p. 87).
Altemeyer (1998) compared the two motivational types as follows:
Right-wing authoritarians, who do not score high on [personal power,
meanness, and dominance], seem to be highly prejudiced mainly
because they were raised to travel in tight, ethnocentric circles; and
they fear that authority and conventions are crumbling so quickly that
civilization will collapse and they will be eaten in the resulting jungle.
In contrast, High SDO’s already see life as “dog eat dog” and—
compared with most people—are determined to do the eating. (p. 75)

The point is that RWA and SDO—which correlate only modestly
at about .20 (Altemeyer, 1998, p. 87; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999, p.
74; Whitley, 1999, p. 129)—may be motivated by somewhat
different concerns, but they are both highly motivated ideologies.
Together, they account for both halves of the “dominancesubmissive authoritarian embrace” (Altemeyer, 1998, p. 47), and
they predict more than half of the statistical variance in prejudice
and ethnocentrism. One can therefore infer that the most inexorable right-wingers are those who are motivated simultaneously by
fear and aggression.

System Justification Theory
We have shown above that most traditional personality theories
about the functions of conservative ideology, especially theories of
authoritarianism, dogmatism, and anxiety reduction, stress egodefensive or ego-justifying aspects of conservatism, that is, the
satisfaction of individual needs for security, obedience, and projection (e.g., Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1981, 1988;
Rokeach, 1960; Wilson, 1973c). Although ego-justifying motives
constitute an important part of the appeal of conservatism, there
are also group-justifying and system-justifying motives that are
satisfied in a particularly efficient manner by right-wing ideologies
(Jost & Banaji, 1994; Jost & Thompson, 2000). Social dominance
theory, for example, stresses the emergence of conservative legitimizing myths as group-justifying attempts to rationalize the interests of dominant or high-status group members (Sidanius &
Pratto, 1999). System justification theory focuses on the motivated
tendency for people to do cognitive and ideological work on behalf
of the social system, thereby perpetuating the status quo and
preserving inequality (e.g., Jost, 1995; Jost & Banaji, 1994).
One of the central goals of system justification theory is to
understand how and why people rationalize the existing social
system, especially when their support appears to conflict with
other important motives to maintain or enhance self-esteem and to
maintain or enhance group standing (e.g., Jost & Banaji, 1994; Jost
& Burgess, 2000; Jost & Thompson, 2000). The theory draws
partially on Marxian and feminist theories of dominant ideology
and on sociological theories of legitimization to explain the acceptance of conservative ideas and practices (Jost, 1995; Jost et al.,
2001). It also draws on ideas from cognitive dissonance theory
(Festinger, 1957) and just world theory (Lerner, 1980) to argue
that people are motivated to perceive existing social arrangements
as fair, legitimate, justifiable, and rational, and perhaps even
natural and inevitable.
The theory of system justification is especially well suited to
address relatively puzzling cases of conservatism and right-wing
allegiance among members of low-status groups, such as women
and members of the working class (e.g., Lane, 1962; Lipset,
1960/1981; Stacey & Green, 1971). To the extent that nearly
everyone is motivated (at least to some extent) to explain and
justify the status quo in such a way that it is perceived as fair and
legitimate, political conservatism should cut across social classes
(e.g., Jost & Banaji, 1994; Kluegel & Smith, 1986). This is
consistent with the analysis of Rossiter (1968), who observed,
“Situational conservatism is not confined to the well-placed and
well-to-do. Persons at all levels of being and possessing may
lament change in the status quo” (p. 291).
The strongest form of the system justification hypothesis, which
draws also on the logic of cognitive dissonance theory, is that
under certain circumstances members of disadvantaged groups
would be even more likely than members of advantaged groups to
support the status quo (see Jost et al., 2003). If there is indeed a
motivation to justify the system to reduce ideological dissonance
and defend against threats to the system’s legitimacy, then it may
be that those who suffer the most because of the system are also
those who would have the most to explain, justify, and rationalize.
One way to minimize dissonance would be to redouble one’s
commitment and support for the system, much as hazed initiates
pledge increased loyalty to the fraternity that hazes them (e.g.,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

Aronson & Mills, 1959) and, presumably, to the fraternity system
in general.
An additional hypothesis that may be derived from system
justification theory is that people should be motivated to defend
the existing social system against threats to the stability or legitimacy of the system. If there is a defensive motivation associated
with system justification, then it should be more pronounced under
circumstances that threaten the status quo. This is a possibility that
was suggested by early accounts of authoritarianism (e.g., Adorno
et al., 1950; Fromm, 1941; Reich, 1946/1970; Sanford, 1966), but
situational threats have received much less attention in recent years
in comparison with the measurement of individual differences (but
see Sales, 1972, 1973). Thus, we hypothesized that situations of
crisis or instability in society will, generally speaking, precipitate
conservative, system-justifying shifts to the political right, but only
as long as the crisis situation falls short of toppling the existing
regime and establishing a new status quo for people to justify and
rationalize.

A Theoretical Integration of Epistemic, Existential, and
Ideological Motives
Although we maintain distinctions among specific hypotheses
for the purposes of assessing cumulative empirical evidence for
and against each, one of the virtues of our motivated social–
cognitive perspective is that it helps to integrate seemingly unrelated motives and tendencies. Specifically, we argue that a number
of different epistemic motives (dogmatism–intolerance of ambiguity; cognitive complexity; closed-mindedness; uncertainty avoidance; needs for order, structure, and closure), existential motives
(self-esteem, terror management, fear, threat, anger, and pessimism), and ideological motives (self-interest, group dominance,
and system justification) are all related to the expression of political conservatism. Now we draw on the perspective of motivated
social cognition to advance the integrative argument that epistemic, existential, and ideological motives are themselves
interrelated.
Theoretical and empirical considerations lead us to conclude
that virtually all of the above motives originate in psychological
attempts to manage uncertainty and fear. These, in turn, are inherently related to the two core aspects of conservative thought
mentioned earlier—resistance to change and the endorsement of
inequality. The management of uncertainty is served by resistance
to change insofar as change (by its very nature) upsets existing
realities and is fraught with epistemic insecurity. Fear may be both
a cause and a consequence of endorsing inequality; it breeds and
justifies competition, dominance struggles, and sometimes, violent
strife. Epistemic motives, by definition, govern the ways in which
people seek to acquire beliefs that are certain and that help to
navigate social and physical worlds that are threateningly ambiguous, complex, novel, and chaotic. Thus, epistemic needs affect
the style and manner by which individuals seek to overcome
uncertainty and the fear of the unknown (e.g., Kruglanski, 1989;
Rokeach, 1960; Sorrentino & Roney, 2000; Wilson, 1973c).6
Existential motives, too, involve a desire for certainty and
security that is associated with resisting rather than fostering
change. Empirical work demonstrates that uncertainty-related
threats and mortality salience have similar and compatible effects
on social and political attitudes, suggesting that epistemic and
existential motives are in fact highly interrelated (e.g., Dechesne,

351

Janssen, & van Knippenberg, 2000; McGregor, Zanna, Holmes, &
Spencer, 2001). Epistemic commitments, it seems, help to resolve
existential conflicts, and existential motives affect the search for
knowledge and meaning. Insofar as knowledge and meaning are
derived from extant cultural arrangements and conventionally accepted definitions of reality, the terror arising from the possibility
of one’s own demise may induce resistance to change (Greenberg,
Porteus, Simon, & Pyszczynski, 1995; Greenberg et al., 1990).
Ideological beliefs, it has often been noted, help to reduce
uncertainty and mitigate feelings of threat and worthlessness (e.g.,
Abelson, 1995; Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1998; Kluegel &
Smith, 1986; Lane, 1962; Rokeach, 1960; Sanford, 1966;
Tomkins, 1963, 1965; Wilson, 1973c). That is, people embrace
ideological belief systems at least in part because they inspire
conviction and purpose. Even more specifically, it has been argued
that needs for system justification arise from the motivated desire
to reduce uncertainty (Hogg & Mullin, 1999), and the belief in a
just world has been linked to epistemic needs to increase prediction and control and to existential needs to maintain self-esteem
and provide meaning and a sense of security (e.g., Kluegel &
Smith, 1986; Lerner, 1980). Authoritarianism has long been associated with rigid and dogmatic thinking styles (e.g., Altemeyer,
1998; Frenkel-Brunswik, 1948, 1949; Rokeach, 1960) and with a
variety of internal and external threats (e.g., Adorno et al., 1950;
McGregor et al., 2001; Sales, 1972, 1973). One of the most
consistent and enduring targets of right-wing criticism has been
immigration, which is often experienced as frightening, confusing,
and potentially threatening to the status quo. Describing the increase in right-wing popularity in Europe following the terrorist
attacks on New York and Washington of September 11, 2001,
Cowell (2002) wrote that “the right appears to be benefiting from
a deep-seated fear that Western Europe— cozy and prosperous—is
the target of a wave of chaotic immigration” from Africa and the
Middle East.
Fear, aggression, threat, and pessimism, we propose, may be
reciprocally related to the endorsement of inequality. Insofar as
inequality seems intrinsically linked to the struggle for dominance
(Sidanius & Pratto, 1999), its engagement may exact a price in the
form of fear, anxiety, and suspiciousness. Fear, in turn, may be
(temporarily) allayed by admitting the reality of threat and preparing to address it by single-mindedly confronting one’s foes (real or
imaginary) and hence embracing inequality as a social necessity.7
In summary, then, we argue that fear and uncertainty are centrally linked to the core convictions of political conservatives to
resist change and justify inequality, especially to the extent that the
status quo breeds inequality. Whereas a plethora of motives (discussed earlier) might prompt individuals to embrace a specific
6
As suggested by an anonymous reviewer, it is also possible that
conservatives do not fear uncertainty per se but rather are especially
concerned with minimizing future negative outcomes. In this sense, it may
be that a pessimistic, risk-averse prevention orientation characterizes conservatives’ thinking about uncertain outcomes, which may explain why
they would, for example, adopt a worst case scenario perspective with
regard to military foreign policy.
7
Although the attainment of certainty and defense against threat represent conceptually distinguishable concerns, there is a sense in which
certainty is also served by inequality in the epistemic domain, namely by
revering epistemic authorities (Ellis & Kruglanski, 1992), whose pronouncements may afford a quick sense of certainty.

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

352

form of conservative ideology, the core aspects of conservatism
seem especially appealing to people who are situationally or dispositionally prone to experience fear or to find uncertainty aversive. Thus, a motivated social– cognitive perspective allows for the
theoretical integration of a large number of variables that are
relevant to overcoming fear and uncertainty in an effort to provide
a coherent, though incomplete, psychological portrait of political
conservatives.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Evidence Linking Epistemic, Existential, and Ideological
Motives to Political Conservatism
We have reviewed several theories of individual differences,
epistemic and existential needs, and individual and collective
rationalization to arrive at eight specific hypotheses concerning the
motivated social– cognitive bases of political conservatism. In
what follows, we consider evidence for and against the hypotheses
that political conservatism is significantly associated with (1)
mental rigidity and closed-mindedness, including (a) increased
dogmatism and intolerance of ambiguity, (b) decreased cognitive
complexity, (c) decreased openness to experience, (d) uncertainty
avoidance, (e) personal needs for order and structure, and (f) need
for cognitive closure; (2) lowered self-esteem; (3) fear, anger, and
aggression; (4) pessimism, disgust, and contempt; (5) loss prevention; (6) fear of death; (7) threat arising from social and economic
deprivation; and (8) threat to the stability of the social system. We
have argued that these motives are in fact related to one another
psychologically, and our motivated social– cognitive perspective
helps to integrate them. We now offer an integrative, meta-analytic
review of research on epistemic, existential, and ideological bases
of conservatism.
The data for our review come from 38 journal articles, 1
monograph, 7 chapters from books or annual volumes, and 2
conference papers involving 88 different samples studied between
1958 and 2002. Some of the original data are derived from archival
sources, including speeches and interviews given by politicians
and opinions and verdicts rendered by judges, whereas others are
taken from experimental, field, or survey studies. The total number
of research participants and individual cases is 22,818 (see Table
1). The data come from 12 different countries, with 59 of the
samples (or 67% of the total) coming from the United States. The
remaining samples were studied in England (n ⫽ 8), New Zealand
(4), Australia (3), Poland (3), Sweden (2), Germany (2), Scotland
(2), Israel (2), Italy (1), Canada (1), and South Africa (1). Sixty
percent of the samples are exclusively composed of college or
university student populations, but they account for only 37% of
the total number of research participants included in our review.
The remaining samples include family members, high school students, student teachers, adult extension students, nonstudent
adults, professionals, politicians, judges, political activists, and
religious ministers. Only one of our hypotheses (concerning system instability) was assessed exclusively with samples from the
United States, and only one other hypothesis (concerning selfesteem) was assessed exclusively with student samples (including
one sample of adult education students).

Epistemic Motives
By far the most convincing research on left–right differences
pertains to epistemic motives associated with mental rigidity and

Table 1
Characteristics of Samples and Participants Used
in Meta-Analysis
Characteristic
Country of sample
Australia
Canada
England
Germany
Israel
Italy
New Zealand
Poland
Scotland
South Africa
Sweden
United States
Total
Type of sample
Exclusively undergraduates
Not exclusively undergraduates
Total

No. of
samples

No. of
cases/participants

3
1
8
2
2
1
4
3
2
1
2
59
87

1,042
354
1,330
571
279
178
998
368
58
233
326
17,081
22,818

53
35
88

8,522
14,296
22,818

closed-mindedness. The notion that political conservatives are less
flexible in their thinking than others originated with work on
authoritarianism (Adorno et al., 1950), intolerance of ambiguity
(Frenkel-Brunswik, 1949), and dogmatism (Rokeach, 1960), and it
also played a defining role in Wilson (1973c) and colleagues’
conception of conservatism as uncertainty avoidance. Christie
(1954) reported significant negative correlations ranging from –.20
to –.48 between IQ and scores on the F-Scale, but researchers since
then have focused on differences in cognitive style rather than
ability. Research on cognitive sophistication and integrative complexity provides the soundest basis for evaluating claims linking
epistemic motivation to political ideology (e.g., Gruenfeld, 1995;
Sidanius, 1985, 1988; Tetlock, 1983, 1984). Recent work on
personal need for structure (Schaller et al., 1995) and the need for
cognitive closure (D. M. Webster & Kruglanski, 1994) helps to
complete the picture.

Dogmatism
A long-standing controversy within the psychological study of
ideology has to do with whether intolerance, closed-mindedness,
and cognitive simplicity are associated more with right-wing attitudes than with left-wing attitudes (e.g., Eysenck, 1954; Eysenck
& Wilson, 1978; Sidanius, 1985, 1988; Tetlock, 1983, 1984;
Wilson, 1973c). An early and persistent criticism of the work on
authoritarianism, for example, has been that, in its zeal to identify
right-wing dogmatism, it has failed to diagnose the dogmatism of
the left (e.g., Rokeach, 1960; Shils, 1954). Over the years, there
have been numerous backers of both the rigidity-of-the-right hypothesis (e.g., Altemeyer, 1981; Christie, 1956) and the more
symmetrical extremist-as-ideologue hypothesis (e.g., Ray, 1973;
Shils, 1954). W. F. Stone (1980) concluded that there was virtually
no evidence for the syndrome of left-wing authoritarianism and
that rigidity and closed-mindedness were consistently associated
more with conservative thinking styles than with their alternatives.
This position has been echoed by Altemeyer (1981, 1998) and
Billig (1984), among others.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

This is not to say that there is no such thing as leftist extremism
or dogmatism (see Barker, 1963), but even when researchers have
identified an increase in dogmatism among leftists in comparison
with moderates, the highest dogmatism scores are still obtained for
conservatives. Rokeach’s (1956) Dogmatism Scale, which has
been widely used in the psychological literature, contains such
ideologically neutral items as the following: “A man who does not
believe in some great cause has not really lived”; “Of all the
different philosophies which exist in this world there is probably
only one which is correct”; and “To compromise with our political
opponents is dangerous because it usually leads to the betrayal of
our own side.” Because the items measure general epistemic
attitudes rather than specific political opinions, dogmatism is included in our review as a psychological variable predicting political contents rather than as a political dependent variable.
Even though it is measured in an ideologically neutral way,
dogmatism has been found to correlate consistently with authoritarianism, political– economic conservatism, and the holding of
right-wing opinions (Barker, 1963; Christie, 1991; Elms, 1969;
Pettigrew, 1958; Rokeach, 1960; Smithers & Lobley, 1978; Stacey
& Green, 1971). Thus, more support exists for the rigidity-of-theright hypothesis than for its alternatives. In commenting on Shils’s
(1954) critique, Altemeyer (1998) concluded,
I have yet to find a single “socialist/Communist type” who scores
highly (in absolute terms) on the [Left-Wing Authoritarianism] Scale.
Shils may have been right about his era, but the “authoritarian on the
left” has been as scarce as hens’ teeth in my samples. (p. 71)

Evidence suggests that dogmatism has been no more useful than
the construct of authoritarianism for identifying rigidity of the left
(see Table 2), but this has not deterred researchers from considering the possibility. Following Rokeach’s (1960) lead, numerous
investigators have brought a variety of methods and theories to
bear on the general question of whether political conservatives are
more closed-minded (i.e., mentally rigid, intolerant of ambiguity,
complexity, etc.) than are liberals, moderates, and others.

Intolerance of Ambiguity
Research on ambiguity tolerance waxed and waned from the
early 1950s to the late 1970s, using a wide range of measurement
techniques (e.g., Block & Block, 1950; Budner, 1962; Eysenck,
1954; Feather, 1969, Sidanius, 1978, 1985). Frenkel-Brunswik
(1949) assessed ambiguity tolerance using case study material
obtained in interviews. Block and Block (1950) measured tolerance of ambiguity by the number of trials a participant took to
establish an individual perceptual norm in the autokinetic paradigm. A number of questionnaire measures of ambiguity tolerance
were devised (see Furnham & Ribchester, 1995, for a review), the
first being Walk’s A Scale, reproduced by O’Connor (1952).
Similar tests were developed by Eysenck (1954) and Budner
(1962), among others.
As hypothesized by Frenkel-Brunswik (1948), intolerance of
ambiguity has been found to correlate positively with ethnocentrism (O’Connor, 1952) and authoritarianism (e.g., Kenny & Ginsberg, 1958; Pawlicki & Almquist, 1973). At least a few studies,
which are summarized in Table 2, provide support for the notion
that intolerance of ambiguity is associated with political conservatism (e.g., Kirton, 1978; Kohn, 1974; Sidanius, 1978). A study
of Israeli university students by Fibert and Ressler (1998) found

353

that intolerance of ambiguity scores were indeed significantly
higher among moderate and extreme right-wing students compared
with moderate and extreme left-wing students. The notion that
conservatism is associated with intolerance of ambiguity is consistent with a great many theories, and it is implicit in ideological
theories of integrative complexity. It may also provide a psychological context for understanding statements such as this one made
by George W. Bush at an international conference of world leaders
in Italy: “I know what I believe and I believe what I believe is
right” (Sanger, 2001).8 Our review suggests that there is a relatively strong connection between dogmatism and intolerance of
ambiguity, on the one hand, and various measures of political
conservatism, on the other. The weighted mean effect size (r),
aggregated across 20 tests of the hypothesis conducted in five
different countries involving more than 2,000 participants (see
Table 2), was .34 ( p ⬍ .0001).9

Integrative Complexity
There is by now a relatively large and methodologically sophisticated body of work that addresses left-wing and right-wing
differences in cognitive complexity (e.g., Gruenfeld, 1995; Sidanius, 1984, 1985, 1988; Tetlock, 1983, 1984). Content-analytic
techniques have been developed to measure integrative complexity, which refers to the extent of differentiation among multiple
perspectives or dimensions and the higher order integration or
synthesis of these differentiated components (e.g., Tetlock, 1983,
1984). Whereas prior research assessing dogmatism and rigidity
among different ideological groups primarily made use of respondents drawn from the population as a whole, Tetlock’s (1983,
1984; Tetlock et al., 1985) work on integrative complexity has
focused on thinking styles among political elites.
In an inventive series of studies, Tetlock (1983, 1984) and his
collaborators (Tetlock et al., 1985) analyzed archival data drawn
from speeches and interviews with political elites. The results are
often taken as evidence for Shils’s (1954) contention that ideologues of the extreme left and extreme right are more dogmatic and
closed-minded than political centrists, and some of the findings
(e.g., Tetlock, 1984) do suggest that extreme leftists show less
cognitive complexity than moderate leftists. At the same time,
however, there is a clear indication in Tetlock’s data that conservative ideologues are generally less integratively complex than
their liberal or moderate counterparts (see Table 3). For example,
a study of U.S. senatorial speeches in 1975 and 1976 indicates that
politicians whose voting records were classified as either liberal or
moderate showed significantly more integrative complexity than
did politicians with conservative voting records, even after controlling for political party affiliation (Tetlock, 1983). These results
were replicated almost exactly in a study of U.S. Supreme Court
justices by Tetlock et al. (1985). In neither of these studies were
liberals found to be significantly less (or more) complex in their
8
On another occasion, President Bush informed a British reporter:
“Look, my job isn’t to try to nuance. . . . My job is to tell people what I
think” (Sanger, 2002).
9
In all cases, mean rs and weighted mean rs are based on Fisher’s z
conversions, following procedures recommended by Rosenthal (1991).
Effect sizes have been weighted by n – 3, as recommended by Rosenthal
(1991). Confidence intervals for weighted mean rs were calculated using
the formula recommended by Cooper (1998, p. 140).

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

354

Table 2
Correlations Between Dogmatism–Intolerance of Ambiguity and Political Conservatism
Psychological variable
Dogmatism

Political variable

Pearson’s
r

F-Scale (fascism)

.82***

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Political–
economic
conservatism

Authoritarianism–
rebelliousness
Conservatism–
radicalism
C-Scale
C-Scale (short
form)
Category specificity

F-Scale (fascism)

Inflexibility

C-Scale (short
form)

Intolerance of ambiguity

C-Scale (short
form)
Authoritarianism–
rebelliousness
General
Conservatism
Scale
Political–
economic
conservatism
Right-wing
political
orientation

Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

Cohen’s
d

Source

Sample characteristic

2.87

Pettigrew (1958)

.56**

1.35

Rokeach (1960)

a

.13*

0.26

Rokeach (1960)

.11

0.22

Rokeach (1960)

.20**
.28***
.48***

0.41
0.58
1.09

Rokeach (1960)
Rokeach (1960)
Kohn (1974)

.20***b

0.41

.58***

1.42

.44***

0.98

.47***

1.06

49 female University of North Carolina
undergraduates
13 members of the student Communist
Society, University College, England
202 Michigan State University undergraduates
207 New York University and Brooklyn
College undergraduates
153 Michigan State University undergraduates
186 Michigan State University undergraduates
62 University of Reading undergraduates,
England
295 University of Bradford undergraduates,
England
93 Protestant ministers, New Zealand

.59***

1.46

.54***

1.28

.59***

1.46

.59***

1.46

.67***

1.81

Smithers &
Lobley (1978)
A.C. Webster &
Stewart
(1973)
Kirton (1978),
Sample 1
Kirton (1978),
Sample 2
Pettigrew
(1958)
Kirton (1978),
Sample 1
Kirton (1978),
Sample 2
Kirton (1978),
Sample 1
Kirton (1978),
Sample 2
Kohn (1974)

.27***

0.56

Sidanius (1978)

.06

0.12

Sidanius (1978)

192 high school students, Stockholm, Sweden
(same sample)

.41***c

0.89

Fibert & Ressler
(1998)

159 second year students, Ben-Gurion
University, Israel

.37***
.34***
.30, .37

0.82
0.73

⫺.03

⫺0.06

286 adults, England
276 adults, England
49 female University of North
Carolina undergraduates
286 adults, England
276 adults, England
286 adults, England
276 adults, England
62 University of Reading undergraduates,
England
192 high school students, Stockholm, Sweden

Total (unique) Nd ⫽ 2,173

Note. F-Scale ⫽ Fascism Scale; C-Scale ⫽ Conservatism Scale.
Rokeach (1960, pp. 88, 121) reported correlations between dogmatism and the F-Scale ranging from .54 to .77 for multiple large samples drawn from
England, New York, and Ohio. However, the samples could not be matched to correlation coefficients based on his report. b Pearson’s r was derived from
the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 292) ⫽ 12.50, p ⬍ .001. c Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 158) ⫽ 31.52, p ⬍
.001. d When multiple tests were computed on the same sample, the sample was counted only once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes
(weighted and nonweighted), and overall significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in
calculations of overall average effect sizes.
* p ⬍ .10. ** p ⬍ .05. *** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted from one-tailed tests when necessary.)
a

thinking than were moderates. Gruenfeld (1995), however, failed
to replicate Tetlock’s (1983, 1984) results after controlling for
majority versus minority opinion status; she obtained no significant differences between liberals and conservatives on integrative
complexity.
Additional evidence does suggest that an overall main effect
relationship holds between cognitive complexity and political con-

servatism. Tetlock’s (1984) study of members of the British House
of Commons revealed a moderate negative correlation between
integrative complexity and ideological conservatism (r ⫽ –.30, p
⬍ .01). He found that the most integratively complex politicians
were moderate socialists, who scored significantly higher on complexity than extreme socialists, moderate conservatives, and extreme conservatives. Tetlock, Hannum, and Micheletti (1984)

Table 3
Correlations Between Integrative Complexity and Political Conservatism
Psychological variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Integrative complexity

Political variable
Conservative voting record
Conservative political
party and orientation
Conservative voting record
and orientation

Pearson’s
r

Cohen’s
d

Source

Sample characteristic

⫺.44***a
⫺.30***

⫺0.98
⫺0.63

Tetlock (1983)
Tetlock (1984)

⫺.61****b

⫺1.54

⫺.38**c

⫺0.82

Tetlock et al.
(1984),
Sample 1

Speeches from 45 Senators, USA
Interviews with 87 members of the House
of Commons, England
Speeches from 35 Senators, 82nd
Congress, USA

⫺.45***d

⫺1.01

⫺.46***e

⫺1.04

.00f
Conservative voting record
(civil liberties)
Conservative voting record
(economic issues)
Conservative voting record
and orientation

Cognitive flexibility
Measure 1

Tetlock et al.
(1984),
Sample 2

0.00

⫺.47**

⫺1.06

⫺.48**

⫺1.09

.19g

0.39

.13h

0.26

.00i

0.00

Tetlock et al.
(1985)
Tetlock et al.
(1985)
Gruenfeld
(1995),
Sample 1
Gruenfeld
(1995),
Sample 2
Gruenfeld
(1995),
Sample 3

⫺.19**

⫺0.39

Sidanius (1985)

Measure 2

⫺.16*

⫺0.32

Sidanius (1985)

Measure 3

⫺.11

⫺0.22

Sidanius (1985)

⫺.11

⫺0.22

Sidanius (1985)

⫺.01

⫺0.02

Sidanius (1985)

⫺.23**j

⫺0.47

Hinze et al.
(1997)
Hinze et al.
(1997)
Altemeyer
(1998)
Altemeyer
(1998)

General Conservatism
Scale

Cognitive complexity
Measure 1
Measure 2
Ordination
Functionally independent
constructs
Attributional complexity

Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

C-Scale

.00

k

0.00

RWA Scale

⫺.17***

⫺0.35

SDO Scale

⫺.19****

⫺0.39

⫺.20****
⫺.20****
⫺.13, ⫺.26

⫺0.43
⫺0.41

Speeches from 35 Senators, 83rd
Congress, USA (same sample)
Speeches from 45 Senators, 94th
Congress, USA
Speeches from 45 Senators, 96th
Congress, USA (same sample)
Speeches from 45 Senators, 97th
Congress, USA (same sample)
Opinions from 23 Supreme Court justices,
USA
Opinions from 23 Supreme Court justices,
USA (same sample)
16 Supreme Court justices, USA
32 Supreme Court opinions,
USA
24 Supreme Court cases, USA

134 high school students, Stockholm,
Sweden
134 high school students, Stockholm,
Sweden (same sample)
134 high school students, Stockholm,
Sweden (same sample)
134 high school students, Stockholm,
Sweden (same sample)
134 high school students, Stockholm,
Sweden (same sample)
84 University of North Texas
undergraduates
84 University of North Texas
undergraduates (same sample)
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada (same sample)
Total (unique) Nl ⫽ 879

Note. C-Scale ⫽ Conservatism Scale, RWA ⫽ Right-Wing Authoritarianism; SDO ⫽ Social Dominance Orientation.
A partial r was derived from the originally reported beta statistic, ␤ ⫽ .35, t(39) ⫽ 3.02, according to the formula: r ⫽ 公t2/(t2 ⫹ df). b Pearson’s r was
derived from the mean (Fisherized) effect size of two originally reported F statistics, one for the difference between liberals and conservatives, F(1,
32) ⫽ 23.37, p ⬍ .001, and one for the difference between moderates and conservatives, F(1, 32) ⫽ 15.24, p ⬍ .001. c Pearson’s r was derived from
the mean (Fisherized) effect size of two originally reported F statistics, one for the difference between liberals and conservatives, F(1, 32) ⫽ 2.13, p ⬍
.25, and one for the difference between moderates and conservatives, F(1, 32) ⫽ 10.70, p ⬍ .01. d Pearson’s r was derived from the mean (Fisherized)
effect size of two originally reported F statistics, one for the difference between liberals and conservatives, F(1, 84) ⫽ 16.39, p ⬍ .0001, and one for the
difference between moderates and conservatives, F(1, 84) ⫽ 12.70, p ⬍ .001. e Pearson’s r was derived from the mean (Fisherized) effect size of two
originally reported F statistics, one for the difference between liberals and conservatives, F(1, 84) ⫽ 21.68, p ⬍ .01, and one for the difference between
moderates and conservatives, F(1, 84) ⫽ 23.61, p ⬍ .01. f Tetlock et al. (1984) reported that “No significant differences existed among ideological groups
in this Congress” (p. 984), so we made the conservative assumption that r ⫽ .0. g Gruenfeld (1995) reported that F ⬍ 1.00 for the difference between
liberals (M ⫽ 1.64) and conservatives (M ⫽ 1.76), so we calculated Pearson’s r on the assumption that F ⫽ 0.50. h Gruenfeld (1995) reported that F ⬍
1.00 for the difference between liberals (M ⫽ 1.38) and conservatives (M ⫽ 1.56), so we calculated Pearson’s r on the assumption that F ⫽
0.50. i Gruenfeld (1995) reported no statistics for the difference between liberals (M ⫽ 1.460) and conservatives (M ⫽ 1.465), so we made the assumption
that r ⫽ 0. j Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 82) ⫽ 4.59, p ⫽ .035. k Pearson’s r was derived from the originally
reported F statistic, F(1, 82) ⫽ 0.007, p ⫽ .935. The precise r would have been .01, but the direction of the effect was not specified by Hinze et al. (1997).
l
When multiple tests were computed on the same sample, the sample was counted only once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes
(weighted and nonweighted), and overall significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in
calculations of overall average effect sizes.
* p ⬍ .10. ** p ⬍ .05. *** p ⬍ .01. **** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)
a

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

356

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

compared the speeches of liberals and conservatives in five separate U.S. congressional sessions. They found that liberals and
moderates scored significantly higher than conservatives on integrative complexity in all three Democratic-controlled Congresses.
Of the two examinations by Tetlock et al. (1984) of Republicancontrolled Congresses, one revealed no differences among liberals,
conservatives, and moderates, and the other indicated that moderates exhibited significantly greater complexity than conservatives,
whereas liberals did not differ from the other two groups. The
authors concluded that their findings “lend indirect support to the
rigidity-of-the-right hypothesis” and that a “general trait interpretation of integrative complexity appears to apply more readily to
conservatives than to liberals and moderates” (p. 987).
Sidanius (1984, 1985, 1988) proposed context theory as an
alternative to the notions that cognitive sophistication is lower
among right-wing proponents or among extremist ideologues of
either side (see also Sidanius & Lau, 1989). Briefly, his argument
was that the relation between cognitive complexity and conservatism should depend on which specific subdimension of conservatism one is dealing with and the psychological function that is
related to that subdimension. With regard to political– economic
conservatism, Sidanius (1985) hypothesized that because of
greater political interest and commitment, extremists of the right
and left would “display greater [italics added] cognitive complexity, flexibility, and tolerance of ambiguity than political ‘moderates’” (p. 638). By contrast, with regard to conservative social
attitudes concerning issues of race and immigration, Sidanius
(1985) predicted (and found) that cognitive complexity would be
negatively and monotonically related to conservatism. Other evidence in support of context theory includes findings from the
United States and Sweden that right- and left-wing extremists (on
political and economic issues) are more likely than moderates to
express political interest and to engage in active information
search (Sidanius, 1984), to exhibit cognitive complexity (Sidanius,
1985, 1988), and to report high levels of self-confidence and
willingness to deviate from social convention (Sidanius, 1988). It
is important to note, however, that at least two studies (Sidanius,
1978, 1985) yield greater support for the notion that cognitive
flexibility decreases in a linear fashion with increasing general
conservatism than they did for any curvilinear prediction. Unfortunately, the studies listed in Table 3 do not provide sufficient
statistical information to allow a meta-analytic test for the presence
of a quadratic trend in the overall data. However, inspection of the
means reported in these studies strongly suggests that the overall
trend is linear rather than curvilinear, with liberals exhibiting the
highest levels of integrative complexity and flexibility. Overall, we
obtained a weighted mean effect size (r) of –.20 ( p ⬍ .0001) for 21
tests of the relation between integrative complexity and political
conservatism, assessed in four different national contexts (see
Table 3).

Openness to Experience
Wilson’s (1973b) psychological theory of conservatism assumes, among many other things, that conservatives are less inclined to seek out strong external stimulation in the form of other
people as well as in the form of nonsocial stimuli. He interpreted
findings indicating that conservatives score lower on measures of
extraversion as consistent with this formulation (Wilson, 1973b, p.
262). Somewhat more direct evidence was provided by Kish

(1973), who found that conservatives scored lower than others on
measures of general sensation seeking (see Table 4). Joe, Jones,
and Ryder (1977) obtained a correlation of –.38 between scores on
an Experience Inventory Scale (including subscales of Aesthetic
Sensitivity, Openness to Theoretical or Hypothetical Ideas, Indulgence in Fantasy, and Openness to Unconventional Views of
Reality) and scores on Wilson and Patterson’s (1968) C-Scale. A
follow-up study by Joe et al. revealed that conservatives were also
less likely than nonconservatives to volunteer for psychology
experiments that required openness to experience (i.e., experiments on aesthetic interest, fantasy production, and sexual behavior) but not for experiments on decision making and humor. These
findings are consistent with other research indicating that conservatives are less likely than others to value broad-mindedness,
imagination, and “having an exciting life” (Feather, 1979, 1984).
One of Costa and MacRae’s (1985) Big Five dimensions of
personality addresses openness to experience. Pratto et al. (1994)
found that openness to experience was correlated with low scores
on the SDO Scale in at least one of their samples (r ⫽ –.28, p ⬍
.01). Jost and Thompson (2000) administered the Big Five inventory along with the Economic System Justification Scale to a
sample of 393 students at the University of Maryland at College
Park, and they found that system justification was associated with
lower levels of openness to experience (r ⫽ –.19, p ⬍ .001).
Peterson and Lane (2001), too, found that openness to experience
was negatively correlated with RWA scores in a sample of college
students that they followed for 4 years. Correlational results
from 21 tests conducted in the United States and Australia (see
Table 4) provide consistent evidence that people who hold politically conservative attitudes are generally less open to new and
stimulating experiences (weighted mean r ⫽ –.32, p ⬍ .0001).

Uncertainty Avoidance
The crux of Wilson’s (1973b) theory is that ambiguity and
uncertainty are highly threatening to conservatives. Wilson, Ausman, and Mathews (1973) examined the artistic preferences of
people who scored high and low on the C-Scale by soliciting
evaluative ratings of paintings that had been classified as either
simple or complex and either abstract or representational. They
found that conservatives exhibited a relatively strong preference
for simple rather than complex paintings and a much weaker
preference for representational rather than abstract paintings (see
Table 5). Similarly, it has been shown that conservatives were
more likely to prefer simple poems over complex poems (Gillies &
Campbell, 1985) and unambiguous over ambiguous literary texts
(McAllister & Anderson, 1991). Similar results have been obtained when preferences for familiar versus unfamiliar stimuli
were compared. For instance, Glasgow and Cartier (1985) demonstrated that conservatives were more likely than others to favor
familiar over unfamiliar music. Converging results that political
conservatives are less tolerant of ambiguity, less open to new
experiences, and more avoidant of uncertainty compared with
moderates and liberals may provide a psychological context for
understanding why congressional Republicans and other prominent conservatives in the United States have sought unilaterally to
eliminate public funding for the contemporary arts (Lehrer, 1997).
In a useful effort to apply Wilson’s (1973b) theory of conser-

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

357

Table 4
Correlations Between Openness to Experience and Political Conservatism

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Psychological variable

Political variable

Pearson’s r

Cohen’s d

Source

a

⫺1.01

42 adult extension students, USA

51 adult extension social work
students, USA
42 University of Nevada—Reno
undergraduates
124 undergraduates, USA

General Sensation Seeking

F-Scale

⫺.45**

General Sensation Seeking
(short form)
General Sensation Seeking

C-Scale

⫺.33***

⫺0.70

Kish & Donnenwerth
(1972)
Kish (1973), Sample 1

C-Scale

⫺.54***

⫺1.28

Kish (1973), Sample 2

⫺.48**

⫺1.09

Experience Inventory

⫺.38***

⫺0.82

Willingness to volunteer
for experiments
requiring openmindedness
Valuing broad-mindedness

⫺.15*b

⫺0.30

Glasgow & Cartier
(1985)
Joe et al. (1977),
Sample 1
Joe et al. (1977),
Sample 2

⫺.39***

⫺0.85

⫺.43***

⫺0.95

Feather (1979),
Sample 1
Feather (1979),
Sample 2

⫺.34***

⫺0.72

Feather (1984)

⫺.32***

⫺0.68

⫺.44***

⫺0.98

Feather (1979),
Sample 1
Feather (1979),
Sample 2

⫺.50***

⫺1.15

Feather (1984)

⫺.27***

⫺0.56

⫺.31***

⫺0.65

Feather (1979),
Sample 1
Feather (1979),
Sample 2

⫺.25**

⫺0.52

Feather (1984)

SDO Scale

⫺.28**

⫺0.58

Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 9

Economic System
Justification Scale
RWA Scale

⫺.19***

⫺0.39

⫺.36***

⫺0.77

⫺.33***

⫺0.70

⫺.31**

⫺0.65

⫺.42***

⫺0.93

Jost & Thompson
(2000)
Peterson et al. (1997),
Sample 1
Peterson et al. (1997),
Sample 2
Peterson & Lane
(2001)
Peterson & Lane
(2001)

⫺.35***
⫺.32***
⫺.28, ⫺.35

⫺0.77
⫺0.68

Valuing imaginativeness

Valuing an exciting life

Openness to Experience
(from the Big Five
Personality Inventory)

Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

Sample characteristic

186 undergraduates, USA

205 undergraduates, USA

558 family members (14 years and
older), Adelaide, Australia
358 Flinders University
undergraduates and their family
members (14 years and older),
Australia
124 Flinders University students,
Australia
558 family members (14 years and
older), Adelaide, Australia
358 Flinders University
undergraduates and their family
members (14 years and older),
Australia
124 Flinders University students,
Australia
558 family members (14 years and
older), Adelaide, Australia
358 Flinders University
undergraduates and their family
members (14 years and older),
Australia
126 Flinders University students,
Australia
97 San Jose State University
undergraduates
393 University of Maryland
undergraduates
198 University of New Hampshire
undergraduates
157 parents of University of New
Hampshire undergraduates
69 first-year University of New
Hampshire undergraduates
69 University of New Hampshire
senior undergraduates (same
sample)
Total (unique) Nc ⫽ 2,606

Note. F-Scale ⫽ Fascism Scale; C-Scale ⫽ Conservatism Scale; SDO ⫽ Social Dominance Orientation; RWA ⫽ Right-Wing Authoritarianism.
a
A weighted mean r was derived from originally reported correlations for men (r ⫽ ⫺.81, n ⫽ 13) and women (r ⫽ ⫺.29, n ⫽ 29). b Pearson’s r was
derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 201) ⫽ 4.50. c When multiple tests were computed on the same sample, the sample was counted only
once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes (weighted and nonweighted), and overall significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from
the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in calculations of overall average effect sizes.
* p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)

vatism as uncertainty reduction to the workplace, Fay and Frese
(2000) used a German translation of an authoritarianism scale to
investigate work-related attitudes and openness to organizational

and technological innovation. This study has the virtue of distinguishing more clearly between psychological variables (acceptance vs. rejection of innovation) and ideological variables (au-

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

358

Table 5
Correlations Between Uncertainty Tolerance and Political Conservatism
Psychological variable
Preference for complex paintings
Preference for abstract paintings

Political
variable
C-Scale

Preference for complex poems

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Preference for modern over
traditional poems

Pearson’s
r

Cohen’s
d

⫺.56***
⫺.14

⫺1.35
⫺0.28

Wilson et al. (1973)
Wilson et al. (1973)

⫺.31*

⫺0.65

Gillies & Campbell
(1985)
Gillies & Campbell
(1985)

.04

0.08

Source

Preference for unfamiliar musica

⫺.30**

⫺0.63

Glasgow & Cartier (1985)

Preference for complex musica

⫺.24

⫺0.49

Glasgow & Cartier (1985)

Preference for ambiguous
literary texts
Comfort with job insecuritya

⫺.40*b

⫺0.87

⫺.22***

⫺0.45

McAllister & Anderson
(1991)
Atieh et al. (1987)

Preference for task variety

⫺.16**

⫺0.32

Atieh et al. (1987)

⫺.33****

⫺0.70

Fay & Frese (2000)

Acceptance of new technologya

⫺.23****

⫺0.47

Fay & Frese (2000)

Interest in work innovation

⫺.42****

⫺0.93

Fay & Frese (2000)

Attempts at innovation

⫺.21****

⫺0.43

Fay & Frese (2000)

⫺.28****
⫺.27****
⫺.21, ⫺.34

⫺0.58
⫺0.57

Readiness to change at work

Authoritarian–
conservatism

Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

Sample characteristic
30 adults aged 23–34, USA
30 adults aged 23–34, USA
(same sample)
34 Glasgow University
undergraduates, Scotland
34 Glasgow University
undergraduates, Scotland
(same sample)
42 University of Nevada—Reno
undergraduates
42 University of Nevada—Reno
undergraduates (same sample)
24 adults aged 18–46, Scotland
155 graduate and undergraduate
students, USA
155 graduate and undergraduate
students, USA (same sample)
478 adults aged 20–67, East
Germany
478 adults aged 20–67, East
Germany (same sample)
478 adults aged 20–67, East
Germany (same sample)
478 adults aged 20–67, East
Germany (same sample)
Total (unique) Nc ⫽ 763

Note. C-Scale ⫽ Conservatism Scale.
Variables have been rephrased from the original source (e.g., “preference for complex” rather than “preference for simple”) and coefficient signs reversed
accordingly to facilitate comparison with other studies and calculate meaningful mean effect sizes. b Pearson’s r was derived from the mean of two
originally reported Mann-Whitney U statistics, one for the difference in preferences between texts that were high versus low in ambiguity (U ⫽ 34.0, p ⬍
.05), and one for the difference in preferences between texts that were low versus moderate in ambiguity (U ⫽ 32.5, p ⬍ .05). c When multiple tests were
computed on the same sample, the sample was counted only once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes (weighted and nonweighted),
and overall significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in calculations of overall average effect
sizes.
* p ⬍ .10. ** p ⬍ .05. *** p ⬍ .01. **** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)
a

thoritarianism) than is typically afforded by studies using the
C-Scale. Fay and Frese (2000) found that authoritarianism was
associated with an unwillingness to change work habits, a rejection
of new technology, and relative disinterest in work innovation in
an East German context (see Table 5). Atieh, Brief, and Vollrath
(1987) found that conservatives were especially likely to value job
security over task variety at work. In diverse aesthetic and organizational contexts, then, evidence from three countries suggests
that conservatives are generally motivated to eschew ambiguity,
novelty, and uncertainty (weighted mean r ⫽ –.27, p ⬍ .0001).

as neat, orderly, and organized than were liberal adolescents.
Altemeyer (1998) obtained a moderate correlation of .34 between
scores on Schaller et al.’s (1995) Personal Need for Structure Scale
and RWA scores. This evidence is consistent not only with research on dogmatism, intolerance of ambiguity, and uncertainty
avoidance but also with the notion that in the realm of political
attitudes, authoritarians long for order and structure, advocating
such diverse measures as firm parental discipline, comprehensive
drug testing, core educational curricula, and quarantines for AIDS
patients (Peterson et al., 1993).

Personal Needs for Order and Structure

Need for Cognitive Closure

A number of theories, including theories of authoritarianism,
dogmatism, and uncertainty avoidance, imply that conservatives
should have heightened motivational needs for order and structure.
The research that exists is consistent with these expectations (see
Table 6). For example, A. C. Webster and Stewart (1973) obtained
a correlation of .24 between the need for order and scores on the
C-Scale. Eisenberg-Berg and Mussen (1980) found that politically
conservative adolescents were more likely to describe themselves

An even more specific account of closed-mindedness exists in
studies of impulsive closure and the need for cognitive closure
(e.g., Dittes, 1961; D. M. Webster & Kruglanski, 1994) than in
studies of dogmatism and intolerance of ambiguity. Here we
consider evidence pertaining to the hypothesis that there is a match
between content-free epistemic motives to make decisions that are
quick, firm, and final and content-laden political attitudes associated with the right wing (see Table 6). In validating their

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

359

Table 6
Correlations Between Needs for Order, Structure, and Closure and Political Conservatism
Psychological
variable

Pearson’s
r

Cohen’s
d

Source

Sample characteristic

Need for order

C-Scale

.24*

0.49

Personal need for
structure

RWA Scale

.34***

0.72

A. C. Webster & Stewart
(1973)
Altemeyer (1998)

SDO Scale

.06

0.12

Altemeyer (1998)

F-Scale (authoritarianism)

.27**

0.56

Right-wing political party
and orientation
Political orientation

.29**

0.61

D. M. Webster & Kruglanski
(1994)
Kemmelmeier (1997)

0.48

Chirumbolo (2002)

F-Scale (authoritarianism)

.46***b

1.04

Chirumbolo (2002)

Self-reported conservatism

.21***

0.43

Jost et al. (1999), Sample 1

Self-reported conservatism

.26***

0.54

Jost et al. (1999), Sample 2

Support for the death
penalty

.47*

1.06

Jost et al. (1999), Sample 3

Religious and nationalist
right-wing beliefs

.27**

0.56

Golec (2001), Sample 1

119 adults aged 18–30, Poland

.31***

0.65

Golec (2001), Sample 2

.82***
⫺.22*

2.87
⫺0.45

Golec (2001), Sample 3
Golec (2001), Sample 1

126 Warsaw School of Advanced
Social Psychology students, Poland
122 student political activists, Poland
120 adults aged 18–30, Poland

⫺.26**

⫺0.54

Golec (2001), Sample 2

.61***
⫺.13

1.54
⫺0.26

Golec (2001), Sample 3
Golec (2001), Sample 1

120 Warsaw School of Advanced
Social Psychology students, Poland
122 student political activists, Poland
119 adults aged 18–30, Poland

.72***
.07

2.08
0.14

Golec (2001), Sample 3
Golec (2001), Sample 1

106 student political activists, Poland
120 adults, aged 18–30, Poland

.70***
.30***
.26***

1.96
0.64
0.54

Golec (2001), Sample 3

109 student political activists, Poland
Total (unique) Nc ⫽ 2,548

Need for cognitive
closure
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Political variable

Economic right-wing
beliefs

Conservative selfplacement (economic
issues)
Conservative selfplacement (social
issues)
Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect
size
95% confidence
interval

.23**

a

93 Protestant ministers, New Zealand
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada (same
sample)
97 University of Maryland
undergraduates
93 University of Mannheim
undergraduates, Germany
178 undergraduates and working
adults, Italy
178 undergraduates and working
adults, Italy (same sample)
613 University of Maryland
undergraduates
733 University of Maryland
undergraduates
19 University of California, Santa
Barbara, undergraduates

.22, .29

Note. C-Scale ⫽ Conservatism Scale; RWA ⫽ Right-Wing Authoritarianism; SDO ⫽ Social Dominance Orientation; F-Scale ⫽ Fascism Scale.
A partial r was derived from the originally reported beta statistic, ␤ ⫽ .25, t(177) ⫽ 3.17, according to the formula r ⫽ 公t2/(t2⫹df). b A partial r was
derived from the originally reported beta statistic, ␤ ⫽ .46, t(177) ⫽ 6.95, according to the formula r ⫽ 公t2/(t2 ⫹df ). c When multiple tests were
computed on the same sample, the sample was counted only once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes (weighted and nonweighted),
and overall significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in calculations of overall average effect sizes.
* p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)
a

individual-difference scale of the need for closure, the NFCS,
D. M. Webster and Kruglanski (1994) obtained a correlation of .27
between NFCS scores and authoritarianism. In two large samples
of undergraduate students at the University of Maryland at College
Park, Jost et al. (1999) administered batteries of measures that
included the NFCS and a single-item measure of self-reported
liberalism– conservatism, with several other instruments separating the two. Modest positive correlations were obtained between
need for closure and conservatism in each of the samples, r(613) ⫽
.21, p ⬍ .001, and, r(733) ⫽ .26, p ⬍ .001.

A study conducted by Kemmelmeier (1997) in Germany demonstrates further that need-for-closure scores increase in a steady,
monotonic fashion as one moves from left-wing to right-wing
party membership. Democratic socialists scored lower on the
NFCS than did members of the Green Party, who scored lower
than members of the Social Democratic Party, who scored lower
than members of the Free Democratic Party, who scored lower
than members of the right-wing Christian Democratic Party. Results yielded no evidence for the hypothesis that extreme individuals of the left and right would exhibit greater cognitive rigidity

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

360

(e.g., Shils, 1954) nor for Sidanius’s (1984, 1985) suggestion that
politically extreme individuals in general would exhibit greater
flexibility and sophistication in their thinking. Instead, Kemmelmeier reported a positive monotonic effect of cognitive style
on political ideology such that increased needs for cognitive closure were indeed associated with membership in right-wing organizations. These results were replicated in Italy by Chirumbolo (2002).
Jost et al. (1999) hypothesized that people who scored high on
the NFCS would be especially likely to support the death penalty,
insofar as capital punishment implies a resolution that is unambiguous, permanent, and final. That is, an empirical connection
between nonspecific epistemic motives and specific ideological
opinions was postulated. An overall correlation of .47 ( p ⬍ .05)
was obtained between need for closure and endorsement of capital
punishment, with the strongest NFCS subscale predictors of support for capital punishment being Discomfort With Ambiguity
(r ⫽ .66, p ⬍ .01) and Preference for Order (r ⫽ .55, p ⬍ .02).
Little wonder, then, that advocates of the death penalty, who tend
to be politically conservative in general, frequently argue that
state-sanctioned executions are beneficial because they allow victims and observers to finally experience “closure.”
Research conducted in Poland by Golec (2001) corroborates the
independent hypotheses that (a) the need for closure is associated
with the preservation of the status quo (whether left-wing or
right-wing) and (b) there is a matching tendency for people who
are high on the need for closure to prefer right-wing ideologies
over left-wing ideologies (perhaps especially when they are relatively high on political expertise). In two studies involving Polish
citizens and students of various colleges and universities, Golec
(2001) found that NFCS scores were correlated positively with
religious and nationalist conservatism, but they were correlated
negatively with (pro-capitalist) economic conservatism, presumably because of Poland’s traditionally socialist economy (see Table 6). However, when she examined youth affiliates of various
political parties (who may be regarded as relatively high in political expertise and involvement), the strongest ever associations
between the (ideologically content-free) NFCS and political conservatism were observed. In a study involving 122 research participants, need for closure was strongly correlated with selfplacement on scales of social conservatism (r ⫽ .70) and economic
conservatism (r ⫽ .72), and it was also strongly correlated with
beliefs indicating religious and nationalist conservatism (r ⫽ .82)
as well as economic conservatism (r ⫽ .61). Thus, personal needs
for order, structure, and closure appear to be especially well
satisfied by right-wing political contents. Aggregating across 20
tests of the hypothesis in six different national contexts, we found
stable and reasonably strong support for the notion that these
specific epistemic motives are associated with a wide variety of
politically conservative attitudes and orientations (weighted mean
r ⫽ .26, p ⬍ .0001).

Existential Motives
Threats to Self-Esteem
According to theories of authoritarianism and uncertainty avoidance, people should be more likely to embrace political conservatism to the extent that their self-esteem is chronically low or
otherwise threatened. Although threats to self-esteem have been
shown to evoke impulsive closure (Dittes, 1961), racism (Sidanius,
1988), and out-group derogation (Fein & Spencer, 1997), there is

relatively little evidence to date linking threatened self-esteem to
political conservatism per se. In arguing that a sense of inferiority
leads to a generalized fear of uncertainty leading to conservatism,
Wilson (1973b) appears to have relied on a single study by Boshier
(1969) in which self-esteem correlated negatively at –.51 with
scores on the C-Scale in a sample of continuing education students
in New Zealand. One study did find that adolescent conservatives
were more likely than liberals to report “worrying about doing
something bad” (Eisenberg-Berg & Mussen, 1980, p. 169), but
they were also more likely to see themselves as ambitious and
successful.
A pair of experimental studies conducted by Sales and Friend
(1973) demonstrate that inducing a failure experience can lead
people to respond in an increasingly authoritarian manner. Specifically, receiving false feedback that they had performed relatively
poorly on an anagram task led people to score higher on a balanced
version of the F-Scale (compared with a preexperimental control
condition). Conversely, receiving success feedback led people to
score lower on authoritarianism. Although the effects were relatively small in magnitude and the results were presented too
ambiguously to include in our meta-analysis, these experiments are
important because they suggest that situational factors can influence the expression of political conservatism.10
In general, however, consistently supportive evidence for the
self-esteem hypothesis has been hard to come by (see Table 7). For
instance, Altemeyer (1998) found that individual self-esteem was
uncorrelated with both RWA and SDO, but that collective selfesteem was weakly and negatively related to SDO. Pratto et al.
(1994) reported that self-esteem was significantly and negatively
correlated with SDO in three of their nine samples, but correlations
varied widely across the nine samples. Our review, which aggregates effect sizes across 17 tests of the hypothesis involving a total
of 1,558 university (or adult education) students from three different countries, leads to the conclusion that there is indeed a
relationship between self-esteem and political conservatism, but it
is relatively weak in magnitude (weighted mean r ⫽ –.09, p ⬍
.001), especially in comparison with our other findings.
Despite the lack of large effect sizes, Altemeyer (1998) has
argued that high authoritarians respond more defensively to egothreatening situations than do low authoritarians. Specifically, he
observed that
High RWA’s asked for evidence supporting the validity of a selfesteem scale when they thought they had scored highly on it, but did
not want to know about the validity of the test when told they had

10
In a dissertation study conducted by Jost (1996), Yale University
undergraduate students were randomly assigned to experimental conditions
in which they were led to believe that alumni from their university were
either more or less socioeconomically successful than alumni from a
comparison school (see also Jost & Burgess, 2000). This manipulation was
intended to evoke feelings of low social status rather than low self-esteem
(and no measures of self-esteem were taken), but the findings were very
similar to those obtained by Sales and Friend (1973). Jost (1996) found that
Yale students who were assigned to the low socioeconomic success condition exhibited significantly higher scores on Altemeyer’s (1981) RWA
Scale than did students assigned to the high socioeconomic success condition, r(133) ⫽ .17, p ⬍ .05. That is, a situational manipulation of low
perceived socioeconomic status was found to increase authoritarianism,
and this effect was not attributable to differences in education or other
variables.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

361

Table 7
Correlations Between Self-Esteem and Political Conservatism
Psychological variable

Pearson’s r

Cohen’s d

⫺.51***

⫺1.19

Boshier (1969)

Self-acceptance

⫺.13

⫺0.26

Boshier (1969)

Self/ideal discrepancy

⫺.30*

⫺0.63

Boshier (1969)

.15

0.30

Wilson (1973d)

⫺.09

⫺0.18

⫺.18***

⫺0.37

Self-esteem

Political variable
C-Scale

Ego defensiveness

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale

Collective self-esteem

SDO Scale

0.18

.01

0.02

.16

0.32

Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 1
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 2
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 3a
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 3b

⫺.23**

⫺0.47

⫺.01

⫺0.02

⫺.29**

⫺0.61

⫺.14

⫺0.28

RWA Scale

.01

0.02

Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 4
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 5
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 6
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 8
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 9
Altemeyer (1998)

SDO Scale

.07

0.14

Altemeyer (1998)

RWA Scale

.04

0.08

Altemeyer (1998)

⫺.08

0.16

Altemeyer (1998)

SDO Scale
Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

.09

Source

⫺.07**
⫺.09***
⫺.04, ⫺.13

⫺0.14
⫺0.17

Sample characteristic
40 adult education students, New
Zealand
40 adult education students, New
Zealand (same sample)
40 adult education students, New
Zealand (same sample)
91 California State University
undergraduates
98 University of California,
Berkeley, undergraduates
403 San Jose State University
undergraduates
80 Stanford University
undergraduates
57 Stanford University
undergraduates (subset of
Sample 3a)
90 Stanford University
undergraduates
144 San Jose State University
undergraduates
48 Stanford University
undergraduates
115 Stanford University
undergraduates
95 San Jose State University
undergraduates
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada (same
sample)
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada (same
sample)
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada (same
sample)
Total (unique) Na ⫽ 1,558

Note. C-Scale ⫽ Conservatism Scale; SDO ⫽ Social Dominance Orientation; RWA ⫽ Right-Wing Authoritarianism.
When multiple tests were computed on the same sample, the sample was counted only once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes
(weighted and nonweighted), and overall significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in
calculations of overall average effect sizes.
* p ⬍ .10. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)

a

scored poorly on it. They also asked to be told if they looked
unprejudiced on the Ethnocentrism scale, but said they did not want to
be informed if they scored highly in prejudice. (p. 81)

Thus, conservatives may not have lower self-esteem in general, but
the possibility remains that they respond differently than others to
potentially ego-threatening situations. A related possibility is that
conservative ideologues are not necessarily lower in self-esteem
but have less stable self-esteem. These considerations lead us to
conclude that more research, especially with nonstudent samples,
is needed to determine whether conservatives respond more defensively (or more aggressively) to self-related threats.

Fear, Anger, and Aggression
Although far more research exists on cognitive differences between conservatives and other people than on emotional differ-

ences, it is a persistent claim that conservatives are more likely
than others to be motivated by fear, aggression, and contempt (e.g.,
Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1996, 1998; Duckitt, 2001; Krugman, 2002; I. F. Stone, 1989; Tomkins, 1963, 1995). Classic and
contemporary theories of authoritarianism similarly stress the possibility that conservatives are punitive toward societally sanctioned
scapegoats because of underlying fear and hostility. As Altemeyer
(1998) argued,
First, High RWA’s are scared. They see the world as a dangerous
place, as society teeters on the brink of self-destruction from evil and
violence. This fear appears to instigate aggression in them. Second,
right-wing authoritarians tend to be highly self-righteous. They think
themselves much more moral and upstanding than others—a selfperception considerably aided by self-deception, their religious training, and some very efficient guilt evaporators (such as going to
confession). This self-righteousness disinhibits their aggressive im-

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

362

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

pulses and releases them to act out their fear-induced hostilities. (p.
52)

Consistent with the notion that conservatives perceive the world as
generally threatening, Altemeyer (1998) reported a relatively
strong correlation of .49 between the perception of a dangerous
world and RWA in a sample of 354 students from the University
of Manitoba, Canada. Duckitt (2001) replicated this finding with
several samples in New Zealand and South Africa, and he has also
obtained weaker (but still significant) correlations between the
perception of a dangerous world and SDO. To the extent that
conservatives are more generally fearful than others, one might
expect that they would also exhibit higher levels of neuroticism,
but this does not generally seem to be the case (see Table 8).
However, an inventive research program on the dream lives of
liberals and conservatives in the United States found that Republicans reported three times as many nightmares as did Democrats
(Bulkeley, 2001). This work, although speculative, suggests that
fear, danger, threat, and aggression may figure more prominently
in the unconscious motivations of conservatives than liberals.
A clever pair of experimental studies conducted by Lavine,
Polichak, and Lodge (1999) supports the utility of a motivated
social– cognitive perspective on political conservatism. Hypothesizing that right-wing authoritarians would be chronically sensitive
to fear-related stimuli, these researchers used response latency
measures to gauge high and low authoritarians’ automatic vigilance for words that were pretested to be either high or low in
threat and danger. In the first study, Lavine and colleagues found
that, compared with low authoritarians, high authoritarians responded faster in a lexical decision task to nonpolitical but threatening stimuli (e.g., cancer, snake, mugger) but not to nonthreatening stimuli (e.g., telescope, tree, canteen). In a second study,
research participants were primed with words that could be interpreted as threat-related or not (e.g., arms) and then exposed to
target words that either completed (weapons) or failed to complete
(legs) the threatening prime–target association. Results indicated
that high authoritarians responded marginally more quickly than
low authoritarians to threatening word pairs but not to nonthreatening word pairs (see Table 8). If, as it seems, conservatives are
more susceptible to fear, it may help to explain why military
defense spending and support for national security receive much
stronger backing from conservative than liberal political leaders in
the United States and elsewhere. Overall, our review of research
conducted in five different countries and involving 22 tests of the
hypothesis suggests that fear and threat are indeed related to
political conservatism (weighted mean r ⫽ .18, p ⬍ .0001). The
correlation is substantially higher if one omits the studies in which
neuroticism was used as the measure of fear and threat (weighted
mean r ⫽ .30, p ⬍ .0001).

Pessimism, Disgust, and Contempt
George F. Will (1998) joked that his “gloomy temperament
received its conservative warp from early and prolonged exposure
to the Chicago Cubs” (p. 21), a baseball team that has not won the
pennant since 1945. Pessimism, he argued, is an essential characteristic of the conservative temperament: “Conservatives know the
world is a dark and forbidding place where most new knowledge
is false, most improvements are for the worse” (Will, 1998, p. 21).
Psychologists, too, have pondered differences between the left and

right in terms of optimism–pessimism and other affective
dimensions.
Tomkins (1963, 1965, 1987, 1995), for instance, proposed that
left-wingers and right-wingers would resonate with different emotional experiences and that right-wingers would gravitate toward
fear, anger, pessimism, disgust, and contempt. Consistent with
Tomkins’s theory, a study of political imagination conducted by
Carlson and Brincka (1987) demonstrated that people projected
different emotions onto Republican and Democratic political candidates. Specifically, people associated conservative leaders with
expressions of anger, contempt, and excitement, and they associated liberal leaders with shame, distress, and joy. However, these
findings may have had more to do with political stereotypes than
with actual affective differences between liberals and
conservatives.
In a study of emotional reactions to welfare recipients, Williams
(1984) found that people who were classified as conservatives on
the basis of scores on Tomkins’s (1964/1988) Polarity Scale expressed greater disgust and less sympathy than did their liberal
counterparts. A study of high school students also indicated that
political conservatives were less likely than liberals to describe
themselves as “sympathetic,” and conservative boys (but not girls)
were less likely to describe themselves as “loving,” “tender,” and
“mellow” (Eisenberg-Berg & Mussen, 1980). In general, however,
affective differences between the left and right are understudied
relative to cognitive differences.
To explain hypothesized or observed correlations between political conservatism and fear, anger, and other negative emotions,
psychologists have typically (or stereotypically) pointed the finger
at parenting styles and practices. The argument that parental punitiveness produces children who grow up to hold right-wing
attitudes is an assumption that is shared by theories of authoritarianism (Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1988), ideo-affective polarity (Tomkins, 1963, 1965, 1995), uncertainty avoidance (Wilson
1973b), and regulatory focus (Rohan & Zanna, 1998). Good research linking parental behavior to the political attitudes of their
children is scant and insufficient (but see Peterson, Smirles, &
Wentworth, 1997) for the obvious reason that it would require 20
or 30 years of continuous snooping to do it comprehensively.
There are clear methodological shortcomings associated with retrospective self-report techniques and reliance on childhood memories, and even under the best of circumstances, there are limitations to drawing causal conclusions on the basis of correlational
evidence. Nevertheless, Altemeyer (1988) reported weak positive
correlations between individuals’ recall of parental anger and
punishment strategies, on the one hand, and current RWA scores,
on the other. Altemeyer (1998) found that correlations between
parents’ RWA scores and those of their children are more substantial, hovering around .40, with neither parent being more
influential than the other (p. 85).
In an elaboration of Higgins’s regulatory focus theory, Rohan
and Zanna (1998) argued that right-wing parents are more likely to
be demanding and punitive in stressing instrumental concerns to
have good manners and to be neat and clean, whereas egalitarian
parents are more likely to use warmth in stressing values relating
to being considerate of others. These differences in parenting
styles may help to explain why right-wing parents are apparently
less close to their children in comparison with more egalitarian
parents (Rohan & Zanna, 1998; Sidanius & Ekehammar, 1979).
Regulatory focus theorists argue that conservatives prioritize con-

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

363

Table 8
Correlations Between Fear of Threat or Loss and Political Conservatism
Psychological variable
Feeling that life is
changing for the worse
Neuroticism

Political variable

Sample characteristic

0.45

Nias (1973)

214 adults, England

C-Scale

.08

0.16

Nias (1973)

.03

0.06

Wilson (1973d)

⫺.02

⫺0.04

.13

0.26

⫺.08

⫺0.16

214 adults, England (same
sample)
97 student teachers aged 18–34,
England
224 Stanford University
undergraduates
97 San Jose State University
undergraduates
100 Stanford University
undergraduates
139 Stanford University
undergraduates
395 University of Maryland
undergraduates

Economic System
Justification
Scale
RWA Scale

⫺.02

RWA Scale

SDO Scale

0.43
⫺0.04

.15**
⫺.09

0.30
⫺0.18

.20*

0.41

.49****

1.12

.45****

1.01

.54****

1.28

.45****

1.01

.00

0.00

.15****

0.30

.21****

0.43

.29****

0.61

a

Response latency to
danger-related words

RWA Scale

.26**

0.54

Primed response
facilitation to threatrelated words
Persuasive impact of
threatening messages

RWA Scale

.17*b

0.35

RWA Scale

.30**c

0.63

.16****
.18****
.15, .22

0.33
0.38

Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

Source

.22***

.21**

Perception of a dangerous
world

Cohen’s
d

C-Scale

SDO Scale

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Pearson’s
r

Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 7
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 9
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 11
Pratto et al. (1994),
Sample 12
Jost & Thompson
(2000)
Peterson et al. (1997),
Sample 1
Peterson et al. (1997),
Sample 2
Peterson & Lane
(2001)
Altemeyer (1998)
Duckitt (2001),
Sample 2
Duckitt (2001),
Sample 3
Duckitt (2001),
Sample 4
Altemeyer (1998)
Duckitt (2001),
Sample 2
Duckitt (2001),
Sample 3
Duckitt (2001),
Sample 4
Lavine, Polichak, &
Lodge (1999),
Sample 1
Lavine, Polichak, &
Lodge (1999),
Sample 2
Lavine, Burgess, et
al. (1999)

198 University of New
Hampshire undergraduates
157 parents of University of
New Hampshire undergraduates
69 University of New Hampshire
senior undergraduates
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada
484 Aucklund University
students, New Zealand
381 Aucklund University
students, New Zealand
233 White Afrikaans students,
South Africa
354 University of Manitoba
undergraduates, Canada
484 Aucklund University
students, New Zealand
381 Aucklund University
students, New Zealand
233 White Afrikaans students,
South Africa
94 State University of New York
at Stony Brook undergraduates
91 State University of New York
at Stony Brook undergraduates
44 voting-eligible
undergraduates, University of
Minnesota
Total (unique) N d ⫽ 3,371

Note. C-Scale ⫽ Conservatism Scale; SDO ⫽ Social Dominance Orientation; RWA ⫽ Right-Wing Authoritarianism.
Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported t statistic, t(56) ⫽ 1.98, p ⬍ .05. Degrees of freedom are discrepant from the sample size
reported in the table because the t test involved a tertile split of the sample. b Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported t statistic,
t(52) ⫽ 1.28, p ⬍ .10. Degrees of freedom are discrepant from the sample size reported in the table because the t test involved a tertile split of
the sample. c Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported t statistic, t(42) ⫽ 2.03, p ⬍ .05. d When multiple tests were computed on
the same sample, the sample was counted only once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes (weighted and nonweighted), and
overall significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in calculations of overall average
effect sizes.
* p ⬍ .10. ** p ⬍ .05. *** p ⬍ .01. **** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)
a

364

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

formity, tradition, and security and that they are likely to be driven
by ought guides (Rohan & Zanna, 1998) and the desire to prevent
negative outcomes (Crowe & Higgins, 1997). It is noteworthy that
ought discrepancies (i.e., prevention-focus failures) have been
related to anxiety and resentment anger (Strauman & Higgins,
1988), and these are largely the same emotional states that have
been associated with political conservatism in other research programs (e.g., Altemeyer, 1998; Carlson & Levy, 1970; Sales, 1972,
1973; Tomkins, 1963, 1965). Nevertheless, more research is
needed before concluding that (a) political conservatives are more
pessimistic or contemptuous than others and (b) their negative
emotions stem from experiences with parental aggression.

Fear and Prevention of Loss
The notion that political conservatives would be more sensitive
than others to the threat of loss is inherent in theories of authoritarianism (e.g., Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1998) and fear of
uncertainty (Wilson, 1973b), and it is highly consistent with regulatory focus theory as well (e.g., Crowe & Higgins, 1997; Liberman et al., 1999). To the extent that conservatives are especially
sensitive to the possibilities of loss— one reason why they wish to
preserve the status quo—it follows that they should be generally
more motivated by negatively framed outcomes (potential losses)
than by positively framed outcomes (potential gains). This is
consistent also with Tomkins’s (1963, 1965, 1987, 1995) theory of
ideo-affective polarity insofar as pessimism is characteristic of
right-wing personalities and optimism is characteristic of left-wing
personalities.
At least one study indicates that authoritarians are indeed more
responsive to threatening or negatively framed persuasive messages than to positively framed messages. Five days before the
1996 U.S. presidential election, Lavine et al. (1999) presented high
and low authoritarians—as classified on the basis of a short form
of Altemeyer’s (1998) RWA Scale—with persuasive arguments
that stressed either the potential rewards of voting (e.g., “a way to
express and live in accordance with important values”) or the
potential costs of not voting (e.g., “not voting allows others to take
away your right to express your values”). This team of researchers
found that high authoritarians were moved significantly more by
threatening messages than by reward messages, whereas low authoritarians were marginally more influenced by the reward message than the threat message. Furthermore, these persuasive effects
were found to carry over into behavioral intentions and actual
voting behaviors.
Research on regulatory focus theory suggests that framing
events in terms of potential losses rather than gains leads people to
adopt cognitively conservative, as opposed to innovative, orientations (Crowe & Higgins, 1997; Liberman et al., 1999). For instance, Crowe and Higgins (1997) used framing manipulations (by
stressing losses rather than gains) to evoke a prevention (vs.
promotion) focus, which was found to be associated with relatively
low cognitive complexity, high mental rigidity, a narrowing of
decision-making alternatives, and conservative and repetitive response styles, as well as with inabilities to complete multifaceted
tasks and to rebound from failure. Liberman et al. (1999) found
that individuals in a prevention focus, whether assessed as an
individual-difference dimension or induced situationally through
framing manipulations, were less inclined to switch to a new,
substitute task and more likely to return to an old, interrupted task.

Furthermore, individuals in a prevention focus, but not those in a
promotion focus, exhibited the “endowment effect,” which captures the reluctance to exchange previously acquired objects for
others of equal or better value. In general, research indicates that
a prevention orientation, which focuses on potential threats and
losses, does facilitate cognitive conservatism, but the extension to
politically conservative attitudinal contents has yet to be demonstrated conclusively. Future research would do well to address this
lacuna.

Fear of Death
A relatively straightforward implication of theories of uncertainty avoidance (Wilson, 1973b) and especially theories of terror
management (Greenberg et al., 1990, 1992) is that the salience of
one’s own mortality should increase ideological defensiveness in
general and perhaps ideological conservatism in particular. High
profile terrorist attacks such as those of September 11, 2001, might
simultaneously increase the cognitive accessibility of death and the
appeal of political conservatism. Consistent with this notion is the
correlation of .54 between scores on a Fear of Death Scale and
scores on the C-Scale obtained by Wilson (1973d; see Table 9).
The most thorough, programmatic research to assess the effects of
mortality salience on social and political attitudes has been carried
out by Greenberg, Pyszczynski, Solomon, and their associates. By
leading experimental research participants to anticipate the cognitive and affective experience of death (e.g., Rosenblatt et al.,
1989), they have demonstrated that mortality salience leads people
to defend culturally valued norms and practices to a stronger
degree (Greenberg et al., 1990, 1995) and to distance themselves
from, and even to derogate, out-group members to a greater extent
(Harmon-Jones, Greenberg, Solomon, & Simon, 1996; McGregor
et al., 2001). In addition, the fear of death has been linked to
system-justifying forms of stereotyping and enhanced liking for
stereotype-consistent women and minority group members
(Schimel et al., 1999).
Mortality salience has also been shown to evoke greater punitiveness, and even aggression, toward those who violate cultural
values. In one especially memorable study with relevance for
political conservatism (Rosenblatt et al., 1989), municipal judges
were found to set significantly higher bond assessments for prostitutes following a mortality salience manipulation (M ⫽ $455) as
compared with a control condition (M ⫽ $50). Although much
more research is needed on a wider set of political variables, it is
conceivable that political conservatives’ heightened affinities for
tradition, law and order, and strict forms of parental and legal
punishment (including the death penalty) are partially related to
feelings of fear and threat, including fear and threat arising from
chronic (or situational) mortality salience. Although we found only
eight relatively clear-cut tests of the mortality salience–political
conservatism hypothesis (see Table 9), and seven of these tests
involved reactions to criminals, the mean-weighted effect size was
very strong (r ⫽ .50, p ⬍ .0001).
In addition to a general main effect trend for mortality salience
to lead people to embrace attitudes and behaviors that are generally
associated with conservative and right-wing ideological positions
(e.g., Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1998; Peterson et al., 1993),
there is some evidence in the terror management literature that
political ideology and mortality salience interact with one another.
A study by Greenberg et al. (1990, Study 2), for instance, found

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

365

Table 9
Correlations Between Mortality Salience and Political Conservatism
Psychological variable
Fear of death

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Mortality salience

Political variable
General Conservatism
Scale
Bond-setting for
prostitutes

Severity of
punishment for
criminals
Mean effect size
Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

Pearson’s
r

Cohen’s
d

.54***

1.28

.44*a

0.97

.40***b

0.87

.65***c

1.71

.77***d

2.41

.45**e

1.01

.56***f

1.35

.23**g

0.46

.52***
.50***
.43, .57

1.26
1.20

Source

Sample characteristic

Nash (1972, cited in
Wilson, 1973d)
Rosenblatt et al.
(1989), Sample 1
Rosenblatt et al.
(1989), Sample 2
Rosenblatt et al.
(1989), Sample 3
Rosenblatt et al.
(1989), Sample 4
Rosenblatt et al.
(1989), Sample 5
Rosenblatt et al.
(1989), Sample 6
Florian et al. (2001)

74 California State University undergraduates
22 municipal court judges, USA
78 undergraduates, USA
32 undergraduates, USA
83 undergraduates, USA
36 undergraduates, USA
34 undergraduates, USA
120 undergraduates from Bar-Ilan University,
Israel
Total (unique) N ⫽ 479

Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 20) ⫽ 4.70, p ⬍ .05. b Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F
statistic, F(1, 47) ⫽ 8.77, p ⬍ .003. c Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 31) ⫽ 23.12, p ⬍ .0001. d Pearson’s r was
derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 79) ⫽ 116.54, p ⬍ .0001. e Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported t statistic,
t(34) ⫽ 2.94, p ⬍ .01. f Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 32) ⫽ 14.98, p ⬍ .0005. g Pearson’s r was derived from
the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 116) ⫽ 6.23, p ⬍ .05.
* p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)
a

that mortality salience led high authoritarians to derogate someone
who was dissimilar to them, but it did not have this effect on low
authoritarians. In another study by Greenberg et al. (1992, Study
1), mortality salience enhanced political intolerance among conservatives, but it enhanced political tolerance among liberals,
presumably because tolerance is an important attribute of the
cultural worldview for the latter but not the former group. As with
theories of epistemic motivation and regulatory focus, we argue
that needs for terror management are broad enough to be satisfied
by a wide variety of attitudinal contents (see also Dechesne et al.,
2000), but there seems to be a better match between the contents
of politically conservative attitudes and the general underlying
motive than is the case with liberal or moderate attitudes.

Threat to the Stability of the Social System
Although most contemporary research on authoritarianism addresses individual differences in social and political attitudes, the
notion that system-level threats (as well as threats to one’s selfconcept) increase authoritarianism is part of the original theory
(e.g., Adorno et al., 1950; Fromm, 1941; Reich, 1946/1970; Sanford, 1966). For example, Reich (1946/1970, p. 13) observed that
as the German economy fell precipitously between 1929 and 1932,
the number of votes for the Nazi party rose from 800,000 to 17
million. History suggests that people do not always move to the
political right under conditions of crisis; in the United States, the
same economic depression resulted in a significant left-wing
movement led by Franklin D. Roosevelt. Nevertheless, the possibility remains that a threat to the stability of the social system, such
as that felt in the aftermath of September 11, 2001, may increase
right-wing conservatism, at least under certain circumstances.11

This possibility is suggested by the theory of uncertainty avoidance (Wilson, 1973b) and by the theory of system justification,
which hypothesizes that (a) there is an ideological motivation to
defend the existing social system against instability, threat, and
attack and (b) this motivation is stronger among proponents of
right-wing than of left-wing ideology (Jost et al., 2001).
There is by now substantial archival research suggesting that
during times of societal crisis, people are more likely to turn to
authoritarian leaders and institutions for security, stability, and
structure (e.g., Doty, Peterson, & Winter, 1991; McCann, 1997;
Peterson et al., 1993; Rickert, 1998; Sales, 1972, 1973). Sales
(1972), for instance, found that during periods of severe economic
threat (the depression years of 1930 –1939), people were more
likely to join authoritarian churches, such as Southern Baptist and
Seventh Day Adventist, and less likely to join nonauthoritarian
churches, such as Northern Baptist and Episcopalian, compared
with periods of relative prosperity (1920 –1930). Similarly, years
of heavy unemployment in Seattle, Washington (1961, 1964,
1969, and 1970), were accompanied by higher than usual conversion rates there for an authoritarian church—Roman Catholic—
and lower than usual conversion rates for a nonauthoritarian
church—United Presbyterian—whereas relatively good economic
years in Seattle (1962, 1965, and 1966) coincided with lower than
11

In the aftermath of the attacks of September 11, 2001, the New York
Times has reported significant increases in right-wing populism in the
following countries, among others: Belgium, Holland, France, Switzerland,
Norway, Denmark, and Portugal (Cowell, 2002; Gordon, 2002; Judt, 2002;
Krugman, 2002). Conservative or right-wing parties were already on the
rise in Italy, Austria, and the United States.

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

366

usual conversion rates for the Roman Catholic Church and higher
than usual conversion rates for the United Presbyterian Church.12
Sales (1973) reviewed disparate evidence in support of the
general hypothesis that poor economic conditions in society are
associated with social and cultural trends that emphasize authoritarian themes of power, toughness, cynicism, superstition, submission, and aggression. For instance, he provided evidence that
literary and popular culture themes during the 1930s were significantly more conservative and authoritarian than during the 1920s.
He also found that budgets in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and New
York City allocated more money to their police departments relative to their fire departments in the 1930s than in the 1920s
despite the fact that crime fell during this time period. Doty et al.
(1991) failed to replicate these differences in budgetary priorities
when comparing a different, high-threat period in the United States
(1978 –1982) with a low-threat period (1983–1987). However,
when they investigated reelection bids for highly liberal and conservative incumbents in the U.S. House of Representatives, they
found that conservatives lost 2.4 percentage points and liberals
gained 7.8 percentage points from the high-threat to the low-threat
period. This supported the threat-conservatism hypothesis (see
Table 10).
McCann (1997) recruited history professors to rate all of the
U.S. presidential election years between 1788 and 1992 on the
degree to which the social, economic, and political circumstances
of that period were “threatening to the American established
order.” Results indicated that during system-threatening times,
presidential candidates who were rated as high on power motivation, forcefulness, and strength were elected by larger margins of
victory than during nonthreatening times. For nine tests of the
hypothesis, all conducted with data from the United States but
from different historical time periods, we found reasonably strong
support for the notion that threats to the stability of the social
system increase politically conservative choices, decisions, and
judgments (weighted mean r ⫽ .47, p ⬍ .0001). As Huntington
(1957) wrote, “When the foundations of society are threatened, the
conservative ideology reminds men of the necessity of some
institutions and desirability of the existing ones” (pp. 460 – 461).

Summary
Our review of the evidence indicates that there is consistent and
relatively strong support for the general hypothesis that a specific
set of social– cognitive motives are significantly related to political
conservatism. Almost all of our specific hypotheses were corroborated. Effect sizes with absolute values of weighted mean rs
ranging from .18 to .27 were obtained for variables of uncertainty
avoidance; integrative complexity; needs for order, structure, and
closure; and fear of threat in general. Stronger effect sizes were
observed for dogmatism, intolerance of ambiguity, openness to
experience, mortality salience, and system instability (with
weighted mean rs ranging from .32 to .50). On the basis of this
evidence, we conclude that a set of interrelated epistemic, existential, and ideological motives successfully predict the holding of
politically conservative attitudes. As illustrated in Figure 1, how
people respond to threatening environmental stimuli, such as fear
and uncertainty, plays a significant role in the development and
expression of political beliefs concerning resistance to change,
inequality, and other core aspects of conservative ideology.

Concluding Remarks
We have argued that several specific motives relating to the
management of fear and uncertainty are associated with the ideology of political conservatism. Our analysis in terms of motivated
social cognition helps both to integrate seemingly unrelated hypotheses derived from the literature on personality and individual
differences and social psychology and to expand on these hypotheses to further understand the role of situational factors in the
vicissitudes of conservatism. By reviewing the results from many
different studies aggregated across various behavioral domains and
contexts, we found that a moderate to strong relationship does exist
between an interrelated set of epistemic, existential, and ideological motives and the expression of political conservatism. In concluding, we consider issues that are deserving of future empirical
attention and summarize what we have learned by viewing political conservatism through a motivated social– cognitive lens.

A Plea for Future Research
One of the most promising implications of treating political
conservatism as a specific manifestation of motivated social cognition is a theoretical and practical focus on situational determinants. This is because explanations in social cognition tend to
emphasize the temporary accessibility of certain attitudes, beliefs,
goals, and motives and their perceived applicability to the immediate situation (e.g., Bargh & Gollwitzer, 1994; Higgins, 1996;
Kruglanski, 1989). We have reviewed existing evidence concerning the effects of situationally induced threats on conservative
political outcomes, but much more of interest remains to be done.
Our hope is that, by underscoring the cognitive–motivational bases
of political conservatism, future research will at long last address
a wider range of social situations and conditions that give rise and
momentum to conservative attitudes, thoughts, behaviors, and
even social movements.
Although the evidence concerning the effects of threat on conservative ideology is highly instructive, other situational predictors
of conservative attitudes and responses are still relatively understudied in the psychology of conservatism. Because conservatism
often takes the form of a social movement that is shared by large
groups of people in particular historical periods (e.g., Diamond,
1995; Habermas, 1989; Kolko, 1963; Lyons & Berlet, 1996), it
may be thought of as a social norm that emerges under certain
social and political circumstances. Our review indicates that too
many psychological accounts of conservatism in the past have
treated it solely as a dispositional orientation and not as a situational reaction, although it is true that the disposition is often
hypothesized to develop in response to certain social and family
situations in childhood (e.g., Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1981,
1988; Sears, 1983; Sulloway, 1996; Tomkins, 1995). For the sake
of understanding the nature of ideology, we hope future studies are

12

We see this research as generally supporting John Lennon’s (1970)
famous observation that “God is a concept by which we measure our pain”
(track 10), insofar as people embrace different religious conceptions as a
function of the degree of adversity and threat they experience.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

367

Table 10
Correlations Between System Instability and Political Conservatism
Psychological variable

Pearson’s
r
.49***a

Cohen’s
d

Source

1.12

Sales (1972)

⫺0.98

Sales (1972)

.51*c

1.19

.77***d

2.41

Sales (1973),
Study 1
Sales (1973),
Study 1

.92***e

4.69

Sales (1973),
Study 2

.78*f

2.49

Sales (1973),
Study 2

.29*g

0.61

Doty et al.
(1991)h

.40*i

0.87

McCann (1997)

.49**j

1.12

McCann (1997)

Mean effect size

.64***

1.81

Weighted mean effect size
95% confidence interval

.47***
.46, .49

1.08

Economic threat

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Political variable

Societal threat (late 1960s)

Social, economic, and
political threat

Conversion to
authoritarian
churches
Conversion to
nonauthoritarian
churches
City budget for police
vs. fire departments

City budget for police
vs. fire departments

Victory margins for
conservative vs.
liberal incumbents
Power, forcefulness,
and strength of
winning presidential
candidate
Presidential
strength—
conservatism

⫺.44***a,b

Sample characteristic
6,887 adults joining four
churches between 1920–
1939, USA
3,601 adults joining four
churches between 1920–
1939, USA
Annual Pittsburgh city budget
for 20 years (1920–1939)
Annual New York city
budget for 20 years (1920–
1939)
State and local budget
expenditures (1967–1969
vs. 1959–1964), USA
City government expenditures
(1967–1969 vs. 1959–
1964), USA
60 incumbent candidates,
House of Representatives,
USA
33 winning presidential
candidates (1824–1964),
USA
33 winning presidential
candidates (1824–1964),
USA (same sample)
Total (unique) N k ⫽ 10,639
(approximate, includes
people and years)

a

Correlations are unweighted means aggregated across several different churches. b The sign on this correlation has been reversed in the calculation of
mean effect sizes so that it is theoretically meaningful. Positive correlations reflect a positive relation between threat and conservatism. c Pearson’s r was
derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 18) ⫽ 6.18, p ⬍ .05. d Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1,
18) ⫽ 26.47, p ⬍ .001. e Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 7) ⫽ 37.17, p ⬍ .001. f Pearson’s r was derived from
the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 7) ⫽ 10.64, p ⬍ .025. g Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported t statistic, t(58) ⫽ 2.33, p ⬍
.05. h Doty et al. (1991) also attempted to replicate Sales’s (1973) analyses regarding police and fire department budgets, but reported only that there was
no trend with a categorical analysis (without providing significance levels). They did, however, report a ⫺.72 year-by-year correlation with their threat
index, but express concerns about the validity of such an analytic approach. i Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1,
29) ⫽ 5.66, p ⬍ .05. j Pearson’s r was derived from the originally reported F statistic, F(1, 29) ⫽ 9.13, p ⬍ .01. k When multiple tests were computed
on the same sample, the sample was counted only once in the calculation of total (unique) N, mean effect sizes (weighted and nonweighted), and overall
significance levels. Multiple effect sizes drawn from the same sample were averaged prior to inclusion in calculations of overall average effect sizes.
* p ⬍ .05. ** p ⬍ .01. *** p ⬍ .001. (All tests two-tailed, converted when necessary.)

as successful at documenting the temporary accessibility of rightwing attitudes as studies of individual differences have been at
documenting the chronic accessibility of such orientations and
their correlates.
Consistent with these goals, we note that there is a strong need
to go beyond purely correlational research designs, which limited
the validity of the earlier personality research on authoritarianism,
dogmatism, and the origins of political ideology and contributed to
its eventual obscurity (see W. F. Stone et al., 1993). Thus far, the
strongest experimental evidence bearing on the possibility of manipulating conservative tendencies probably comes from the mortality salience paradigm used by terror management theorists.
Priming thoughts of death has been shown to increase intolerance,
out-group derogation, punitive aggression, veneration of authority
figures, and system justification (Florian et al., 2001; Greenberg et

al., 1990, 1995; McGregor et al., 2001; Rosenblatt et al., 1989;
Schimel et al., 1999; van den Bos & Miedema, 2000). Other
archival and experimental evidence suggests that social and economic threats increase authoritarian and right-wing responding
(e.g., Doty et al., 1991; Jost, 1996; McCann, 1997; Reich, 1946/
1970; Sales, 1972, 1973; Sales & Friend, 1973). Experimental
paradigms developed in studies of the need for cognitive closure,
prevention versus promotion regulatory focus, and system justification are also highly promising candidates for use in future
research on situational variation in conservatism. The next generation of researchers should also strive, whenever possible, to
include more direct measures of epistemic, existential, and ideological motives.
All of the motives we have reviewed are theoretically related to
one or both of two core dimensions of conservative thought,

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

368

Figure 1.

An integrative model of political conservatism as motivated social cognition.

namely, resistance to change and support for inequality. The quest
for certainty and ideological stability, we have argued, is linked to
the goal of resisting social and political change (e.g., Wilson,
1973c). Motives pertaining to fear and threat, by comparison, are
more likely to be associated with ideological support for inequality, insofar as it justifies the striving for security and dominance in
social hierarchies (e.g., Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). These are theoretical points that await direct empirical confrontation, especially
as regards the direction of causality. Do psychological motives
cause the adoption of specific ideological beliefs concerning resistance to change and support for inequality, or do these ideological commitments carry with them psychological consequences, or
both? Our review has presented consistent correlational evidence
linking the psychological and the political, and our integrated
theoretical framework has identified plausible interpretations of
these data, but direct causal investigations are needed in the future
to substantiate the particulars of our theoretical perspective.
Finally, it is also important that subsequent research reflect a
wide range of political ideologies and broadly representative samples so that it does not merely address the ideological life of
college students (see Sears, 1986; Whitley & Lee, 2000). On one

hand, political ideology probably has greater consistency and
meaning for college-educated respondents; on the other, the ideological contents of political conservatism (and its opposites) may
be different in a predominantly liberal environment such as a
college campus compared with other contexts. Such locations may
prove useful in future studies of social and cognitive motives
associated with political liberalism, which we would also encourage. Although we have made a special effort to include nonstudent
samples in our review, two thirds of the studies we reviewed were
conducted with university students. The use of nonrepresentative
samples stymied research progress on the authoritarian personality
for many years (e.g., Hyman & Sheatsley, 1954) until it was
revived by Altemeyer (1981, 1988, 1996, 1998). It is essential that
contemporary researchers of political conservatism not make the
same mistake.
The trend to investigate ideological opinions and right-wing
tendencies in a wide variety of national contexts is one that we
hope continues (e.g., Fay & Frese, 2000; Fibert & Ressler, 1998;
Golec, 2001; Hamilton, Sanders, & McKearney, 1995; Jost et al.,
2001; Kemmelmeier, 1997; Mercer & Cairns, 1981; Sidanius,
1984, 1985; Sidanius & Ekehammar, 1979). We reviewed research

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION

conducted in 12 different countries: the United States, Canada,
England, Scotland, Sweden, Italy, Germany, Poland, Israel, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. Thus, the conclusions we
have reached possess a considerable degree of cultural generalizability. Nevertheless, future research— especially if conducted in
traditionally socialist or communist societies in which adherence
to the status quo is unconfounded with right-wing ideological
orientation—would add significantly to knowledge about political
conservatism as motivated social cognition. Our conviction is that
important and groundbreaking advances await any researcher who
is willing and able to conduct causal, experimental studies on the
personal and situational determinants of conservative ideological
responses in research samples that are representative and culturally
diverse. We hope the present article serves as a stimulus for
renewed, methodologically sophisticated attention to the psychological bases of political conservatism.

What Have We Learned?
Understanding the psychological underpinnings of conservatism
has for centuries posed a challenge for historians, philosophers,
and social scientists. By now, hundreds of empirical investigations
have been carried out worldwide, and at least three types of
theories have been offered to explicate the psychological bases of
conservative and right-wing ideologies. Our contribution here has
been to review and summarize this work and to integrate it within
the ambitious and broad framework of motivated social cognition
(see Figure 1). In doing so, we have drawn a number of conclusions, which should be made explicit in order to better understand
the various ways in which political conservatism may be thought
of as a form of motivated social cognition.
An important conclusion that follows from our analysis is that
political attitudes and beliefs possess a strong motivational basis
(e.g., Duckitt, 2001; Dunning, 1999; Fiske & Taylor, 1991;
Kruglanski, 1996; Kunda, 1990). Conservative ideologies, like
virtually all other belief systems, are adopted in part because they
satisfy various psychological needs. To say that ideological belief
systems have a strong motivational basis is not to say that they are
unprincipled, unwarranted, or unresponsive to reason or evidence.
Although the (partial) causes of ideological beliefs may be motivational, the reasons (and rationalizations) whereby individuals
justify those beliefs to themselves and others are assessed according to informational criteria (Kruglanski, 1989, 1999).
Many different theoretical accounts of conservatism over the
past 50 years have stressed motivational underpinnings, but they
have identified different needs as critical. Our review brings these
diverse accounts together for the first time. Variables significantly
associated with conservatism, we now know, include fear and
aggression (Adorno et al., 1950; Altemeyer, 1998; Lavine et al.,
1999), dogmatism and intolerance of ambiguity (Fibert & Ressler,
1998; Frenkel-Brunswik, 1948; Rokeach, 1960; Sidanius, 1978),
uncertainty avoidance (McGregor et al., 2001; Sorrentino &
Roney, 1986; Wilson, 1973b), need for cognitive closure (Golec,
2001; Jost et al., 1999; Kemmelmeier, 1997; Kruglanski & Webster, 1996), personal need for structure (Altemeyer, 1998; Schaller
et al., 1995; Smith & Gordon, 1998), terror management
(Dechesne et al., 2000; Greenberg et al., 1990, 1992; Wilson,
1973d), group-based dominance (Pratto et al., 1994; Sidanius,
1993; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999), and system justification (Jost &
Banaji, 1994; Jost et al., 2001; Jost & Thompson, 2000). From our

369

perspective, these psychological factors are capable of contributing
to the adoption of conservative ideological contents, either independently or in combination.
The socially constructed nature of human belief systems (see
Jost & Kruglanski, 2002) makes it unlikely that a complete explanation of conservative ideology could ever be provided in terms of
a single motivational syndrome. Ideologies, like other social representations, may be thought of as possessing a core and a periphery (Abric, 2001), and each may be fueled by separate motivational concerns. The most that can be expected of a general
psychological analysis is for it to partially explain the core of
political conservatism because the peripheral aspects are by definition highly protean and driven by historically changing, local
contexts.
We regard political conservatism as an ideological belief system
that is significantly (but not completely) related to motivational
concerns having to do with the psychological management of
uncertainty and fear. Specifically, the avoidance of uncertainty
(and the striving for certainty) may be particularly tied to one core
dimension of conservative thought, resistance to change (Wilson,
1973c). Similarly, concerns with fear and threat may be linked to
the second core dimension of conservatism, endorsement of inequality (Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). Although resistance to change
and support for inequality are conceptually distinguishable, we
have argued that they are psychologically interrelated, in part
because motives pertaining to uncertainty and threat are interrelated (e.g., Dechesne et al., 2000; McGregor et al., 2001; van den
Bos & Miedema, 2000).
In conclusion, our comprehensive review integrates several decades of research having to do with the psychological bases of
political conservatism. Most of what is known about the psychology of conservatism fits exceedingly well with theories of motivated social cognition. The integrative framework developed here
has implications for resolving historically controversial issues, and
we have argued that it has great generative potential for guiding
future work on the subject of conservatism. By attending to the
multiple, potentially reinforcing influences of epistemic, existential, and ideological motivations involved in political conservatism, we hope that future research strengthens understanding of
belief systems in general. It should also shed light on the nature of
relations between the micro and the macro, that is, on the reciprocal dynamics between the needs of individual and group actors
on one hand and the complex characteristics of social and political
systems, institutions, and organizations on the other.

References
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the
meta-analysis.
Abelson, R. P. (1995). Attitude extremity. In R. E. Petty & J. A. Krosnick
(Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp. 25– 41).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Abelson, R. P., & Prentice, D. A. (1989). Beliefs as possessions: A
functional perspective. In A. R. Pratkanis, S. J. Breckler, & A. G.
Greenwald (Eds.), Attitude structure and function (pp. 361–381). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Abric, J. C. (2001). A structural approach to social representations. In K.
Deaux & G. Philogéne (Eds.), Representations of the social (pp. 42– 47).
Oxford: Blackwell.
Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D. J., & Sanford, R. N.
(1950). The authoritarian personality. New York: Harper.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

370

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

Alexander, I. E. (1995). Ideology as part of the Tomkins legacy. In E. V.
Demos (Ed.), Exploring affect: The selected writings of Silvan S.
Tomkins (pp. 101–167). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Altemeyer, R. A. (1981). Right-wing authoritarianism. Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada: University of Manitoba Press.
Altemeyer, R. A. (1988). Enemies of freedom: Understanding right-wing
authoritarianism. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Altemeyer, R. A. (1996). The authoritarian specter. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
*Altemeyer, R. A. (1998). The other “authoritarian personality.” In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 30, pp.
47–91). New York: Academic Press.
Anderson, B., Zelditch, M., Jr., Takagi, P., & Whiteside, D. (1965). On
conservative attitudes. Acta Sociologica, 8, 189 –203.
Arndt, J., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Pyszczynski, T., & Simon, L. (1997).
Suppression, accessibility of death-related thoughts, and cultural worldview defense: Exploring the psychodynamics of worldview defense.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 5–18.
Aronson, E., & Mills, J. (1959). The effect of severity of initiation on liking
for a group. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 59, 177–181.
*Atieh, J. M., Brief, A. P., & Vollrath, D. A. (1987). The Protestant work
ethic conservatism paradox: Beliefs and values in work and life. Personality and Individual Differences, 8, 577–580.
Bagley, C., Wilson, G. D., & Boshier, R. (1970). The Conservatism Scale:
A factor structure comparison of English, Dutch, and New Zealand
samples. Journal of Social Psychology, 81, 267–268.
Bahr, H. M., & Chadwick, B. A. (1974). Conservatism, racial intolerance,
and attitudes toward racial assimilation among Whites and American
Indians. Journal of Social Psychology, 94, 45–56.
Bargh, J. A., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1994). Environmental control of goaldirected action: Automatic and strategic contingencies between situations and behavior. In W. Spaulding (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation: Vol. 41. Integrative views of motivation, cognition, and
emotion (pp. 71–124). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Barker, E. N. (1963). Authoritarianism of the political right, center, and
left. Journal of Social Issues, 19, 63–74.
Becker, E. (1973). The denial of death. New York: Free Press.
Billig, M. (1984). Political ideology: Social psychological aspects. In H.
Tajfel (Ed.), The social dimension (Vol. 2, pp. 446 – 470). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Birt, R. (1993). Personality and foreign policy: The case of Stalin. Political
Psychology, 14, 607– 625.
Block, J., & Block, J. (1950). Intolerance of ambiguity and ethnocentrism.
Journal of Personality, 19, 303–311.
Bobbio, N. (1996). Left and right. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.
*Boshier, R. (1969). The relationship between self-concept and conservatism. Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 139 –141.
Brown, R. (1965). Social psychology. New York: Free Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1957). On perceptual readiness. Psychological Review, 64,
123–152.
Budner, S. (1962). Intolerance of ambiguity as a personality variable.
Journal of Personality, 30, 29 –59.
Bulkeley, K. (2001, July). Dreams and politics. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Association for the Study of Dreams, Santa Cruz,
CA.
Bullock, A. (1993). Hitler and Stalin: Parallel lives. New York: Vintage
Books.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 116 –131.
Carlson, R., & Brincka, J. (1987). Studies in script theory: III. Ideology and
political imagination. Political Psychology, 8, 563–574.
Carlson, R., & Levy, N. (1970). Self, values, and affects: Derivations from
Tomkins’ polarity theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
16, 338 –345.

Carmines, E. G., & Berkman, M. (1994). Ethos, ideology, and partisanship:
Exploring the paradox of conservative Democrats. Political Behavior,
16, 203–218.
Centers, R. (1949). The psychology of social classes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
*Chirumbolo, A. (2002). The relationship between need for cognitive
closure and political orientation: The mediating role of authoritarianism.
Personality and Individual Differences, 32, 603– 610.
Christie, R. (1954). Authoritarianism re-examined. In R. Christie & M.
Jahoda (Eds.), Studies in the scope and method of “The Authoritarian
Personality” (pp. 123–196). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Christie, R. (1956). Eysenck’s treatment of the personality of communists.
Psychological Bulletin, 53, 411– 430.
Christie, R. (1991). Authoritarianism and related constructs. In J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality
and social psychological attitudes (pp. 501–571). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Conover, P. J., & Feldman, S. (1981). The origins and meaning of liberal/
conservative self-identification. American Journal of Political Science,
25, 617– 645.
Converse, P. E. (1964). The nature of belief systems in mass publics. In D.
Apter (Ed.), Ideology and discontent. New York: Free Press.
Cooper, H. (1998). Synthesizing research (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Costa, P. T., & MacRae, R. R. (1985). The NEO Personality Inventory
Manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Cowell, A. (2002, May 18). Europe “is rubbing its eyes” at the ascent of the
right. The New York Times, p. A3.
Crowe, E., & Higgins, E. T. (1997). Regulatory focus and strategic inclinations: Promotion and prevention in decision-making. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 69, 117–132.
Danigelis, N. L., & Cutler, S. J. (1991). Cohort trends in attitudes about law
and order: Who’s leading the conservative wave? Public Opinion Quarterly, 55, 24 – 49.
Dechesne, M., Janssen, J., & van Knippenberg, A. (2000). Derogation and
distancing as terror management strategies: The moderating role of need
for closure and permeability of group boundaries. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 79, 923–932.
de St. Aubin, E. (1996). Personal ideology polarity: Its emotional foundation and its manifestation in individual value systems, religiosity, political orientation, and assumptions concerning human nature. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 152–165.
Diamond, S. (1995). Roads to dominion: Right-wing movements and political power in the United States. New York: Guilford Press.
Dittes, J. E. (1961). Impulsive closure as a reaction to failure-induced
threat. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 562–569.
Ditto, P. H., & Lopez, D. F. (1992). Motivated skepticism: Use of differential decision criteria for preferred and nonpreferred conclusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 568 –584.
*Doty, R. M., Peterson, B. E., & Winter, D. G. (1991). Threat and
authoritarianism in the United States, 1978 –1987. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 629 – 640.
*Duckitt, J. (2001). A dual-process cognitive-motivational theory of ideology and prejudice. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 33,
41–113.
Dunning, D. (1999). A newer look: Motivated social cognition and the
schematic representation of social concepts. Psychological Inquiry, 10,
1–11.
Durrheim, K. (1997). Theoretical conundrum: The politics and science of
theorizing authoritarian cognition. Political Psychology, 18, 625– 656.
Eagleton, T. (1991). Ideology: An introduction. New York: Verso.
Eckhardt, W. (1991). Authoritarianism. Political Psychology, 12, 97–121.
Eckhardt, W., & Alcock, N. Z. (1970). Ideology and personality in war/
peace attitudes. Journal of Social Psychology, 81, 105–116.
Eisenberg-Berg, N., & Mussen, P. (1980). Personality correlates of socio-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION
political liberalism and conservatism in adolescents. Journal of Genetic
Psychology, 137, 165–177.
Ellis, S., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1992). Self as epistemic authority: Effects
on experiential and instructional learning. Social Cognition, 10, 357–
375.
Elms, A. C. (1969). Psychological factors in right-wing extremism. In
R. A. Schoenberger (Ed.), The American right wing (pp. 143–163). New
York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Eysenck, H. J. (1954). The psychology of politics. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Eysenck, H. J., & Wilson, G. D. (Eds.). (1978). The psychological basis of
ideology. Lancaster, England: MTP Press.
*Fay, D., & Frese, M. (2000). Conservatives’ approach to work: Less
prepared for future work demands? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 171–195.
Feather, N. T. (1969). Preference for information in relation to consistency,
novelty, intolerance of ambiguity and dogmatism. Australian Journal of
Psychology, 31, 235–249.
*Feather, N. T. (1979). Value correlates of conservatism. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1617–1630.
*Feather, N. T. (1984). Protestant ethic, conservatism, and values. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 1132–1141.
Fein, S., & Spencer, S. J. (1997). Prejudice as self-image maintenance:
Affirming the self through negative evaluations of others. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 31– 44.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row,
Peterson.
*Fibert, Z., & Ressler, W. H. (1998). Intolerance of ambiguity and political
orientation among Israeli university students. Journal of Social Psychology, 138, 33– 40.
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition (2nd ed.). New York:
McGraw Hill.
*Florian, V., Mikulincer, M., & Hirschberger, G. (2001). An existentialist
view on mortality salience effects: Personal hardiness, death-thought
accessibility, and cultural worldview defenses. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 40, 437– 453.
Frenkel-Brunswik, E. (1948). Tolerance toward ambiguity as a personality
variable [Abstract]. American Psychologist, 3, 268.
Frenkel-Brunswik, E. (1949). Intolerance of ambiguity as an emotional
perceptual personality variable. Journal of Personality, 18, 108 –143.
Frenkel-Brunswik, E. (1951). Personality theory and perception. In R.
Blake and G. Ramsey (Eds.), Perception: An approach to personality
(pp. 356 – 419). New York: Oxford University Press.
Frey, D. (1986). Selective exposure to information: A review of recent
research. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 41– 80). New York: Academic Press.
Fromm, E. (1941). Escape from freedom. New York: Holt, Rinehart, &
Winston.
Furnham, A., & Ribchester, T. (1995). Tolerance of ambiguity: A review
of the concept, its measurement and applications. Current Psychology:
Developmental, Learning, Personality, Social, 14, 179 –200.
Giddens, A. (1998). The third way: The renewal of social democracy.
Cambridge, England: Polity Press.
*Gillies, J., & Campbell, S. (1985). Conservatism and poetry preferences.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 24, 223–227.
*Glasgow, M. R., & Cartier, A. M. (1985). Conservatism, sensationseeking, and music preferences. Personality and Individual Differences,
6, 393–395.
*Golec, A. (2001, July). Need for cognitive closure and political conservatism: Studies on the nature of the relationship. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the International Society of Political Psychology,
Cuernavaca, Mexico.
Gordon, P. H. (2002, April 23). The jolt in a victory on the right. The New
York Times, p. A23.
Greenberg, J., Porteus, J., Simon, L., & Pyszczynski, T. (1995). Evidence

371

of a terror management function of cultural icons: The effects of mortality salience on the inappropriate use of cherished cultural symbols.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1221–1228.
Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S. (1986). The causes and
consequences of the need for self-esteem: A terror management theory.
In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Public self and private self (pp. 189 –207).
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., Rosenblatt, A., Veeder, M.,
Kirkland, S., & Lyon, D. (1990). Evidence for terror management
theory: II. The effects of mortality salience on reactions to those who
threaten or bolster the cultural worldview. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 308 –318.
Greenberg, J., Simon, L., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S., & Chatel, D.
(1992). Terror management and tolerance: Does mortality salience always intensify negative reactions to others who threaten one’s worldview? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 212–220.
Greenwald, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of
personal history. American Psychologist, 35, 603– 618.
*Gruenfeld, D. H. (1995). Status, ideology, and integrative ideology on the
U.S. Supreme Court: Rethinking the politics of political decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 5–20.
Habermas, J. (1989). The new conservatism: Cultural criticism and the
historians’ debate (S. W. Nicholsen, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Hamilton, D. L., & Rose, T. L. (1980). Illusory correlation and the
maintenance of stereotypic beliefs. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 39, 832– 845.
Hamilton, V. L., Sanders, J., & McKearney, S. J. (1995). Orientations
toward authority in an authoritarian state: Moscow in 1990. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 356 –365.
Harmon-Jones, E., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Simon, L. (1996). The
effects of mortality salience on intergroup discrimination between minimal groups. European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 677– 681.
Hastorf, A. H., & Cantril, H. (1954). They saw a game: A case study.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 49, 129 –134.
Higgins, E. T. (1996). Knowledge activation: Accessibility, applicability,
and salience. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social
psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 133–168). New York:
Guilford Press.
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist,
52, 1280 –1300.
Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as a
motivational principle. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
30, 1– 45.
*Hinze, T., Doster, J., & Joe, V. C. (1997). The relationship of conservatism and cognitive-complexity. Personality and Individual Differences,
22, 297–298.
Hofstede, G. H. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hogg, M. A., & Mullin, B.-A. (1999). Joining groups to reduce uncertainty: Subjective uncertainty reduction and group identification. In D.
Abrams & M. A. Hogg (Eds.), Social identity and social cognition (pp.
249 –279). Oxford: Blackwell.
Huntington, S. (1957). Conservatism as an ideology. American Political
Science Review, 51, 454 – 473.
Hyman, H. H., & Sheatsley, P. B. (1954). “The Authoritarian Personality”—A methodological critique. In R. Christie & M. Jahoda (Eds.),
Studies in the scope and method of “The Authoritarian Personality” (pp.
50 –122). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
*Joe, V. C., Jones, R. N., and Ryder, S. (1977). Conservatism, openness to
experience and sample bias. Journal of Personality Assessment, 41,
527–531.
Jost, J. T. (1995). Negative illusions: Conceptual clarification and psycho-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

372

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

logical evidence concerning false consciousness. Political Psychology,
16, 397– 424.
Jost, J. T. (1996). Ingroup and outgroup favoritism among groups differing
in socio-economic success: Effects of perceived legitimacy and justification processes (Doctoral dissertation, Yale University, 1996). Dissertation Abstracts International, 57, 763B.
Jost, J. T., & Banaji, M. R. (1994). The role of stereotyping in systemjustification and the production of false consciousness. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 33, 1–27.
Jost, J. T., & Burgess, D. (2000). Attitudinal ambivalence and the conflict
between group and system justification motives in low status groups.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 293–305.
Jost, J. T., Burgess, D., & Mosso, C. (2001). Conflicts of legitimation
among self, group, and system: The integrative potential of system
justification theory. In J. T. Jost & B. Major (Eds.), The psychology of
legitimacy: Emerging perspectives on ideology, justice, and intergroup
relations (pp. 363–388). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jost, J. T., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2002). The estrangement of social
constructionism and experimental social psychology: History of the rift
and prospects for reconciliation. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 6, 168 –187.
*Jost, J. T., Kruglanski, A. W., & Simon, L. (1999). Effects of epistemic
motivation on conservatism, intolerance, and other system justifying
attitudes. In L. Thompson, D. M. Messick, & J. M. Levine (Eds.),
Shared cognition in organizations: The management of knowledge (pp.
91–116). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jost, J. T., Pelham, B. W., Sheldon, O., & Sullivan, B. (2003). Social
inequality and the reduction of ideological dissonance on behalf of the
system: Evidence of enhanced system justification among the disadvantaged. European Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 13–36.
*Jost, J. T., & Thompson, E. P. (2000). Group-based dominance and
opposition to equality as independent predictors of self-esteem, ethnocentrism, and social policy attitudes among African Americans and
European Americans. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 36,
209 –232.
Judd, C. M., Krosnick, J. A., & Milburn, M. A. (1981). Political involvement in attitude structure in the general public. American Sociological
Review, 46, 660 – 669.
Judt, T. (2002, April 28). America’s restive partners [Electronic version].
The New York Times (Late edition final), Section 4, p. 15.
*Kemmelmeier, M. (1997). Need for closure and political orientation
among German university students. Journal of Social Psychology, 137,
787–789.
Kenny, D. T., & Ginsberg, R. (1958). The specificity of intolerance of
ambiguity measures. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 56,
300 –304.
Kerlinger, F. M. (1984). Social attitude statement and referent scales. (pp.
118 –342). Liberalism and conservatism: The nature and structure of
social attitudes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
*Kirton, M. J. (1978). Wilson and Patterson’s Conservatism Scale: A
shortened alternative form. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 17, 319 –323.
*Kish, G. B. (1973). Stimulus-seeking and conservatism. In G. D. Wilson
(Ed.), The psychology of conservatism (pp. 197–207). London: Academic Press.
*Kish, G. B., & Donnenwerth, G. V. (1972). Sex differences in the
correlates of stimulus seeking. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 38, 42– 49.
Kluegel, J. R., & Smith, E. R. (1986). Beliefs about inequality: Americans’
views of what is and what ought to be. New York: Aldine De Gruyter.
Knight, K. (1999). Liberalism and conservatism. In J. P. Robinson, P. R.
Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of political attitudes (pp.
59 –158). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
*Kohn, P. M. (1974). Authoritarianism, rebelliousness, and their correlates

among British undergraduates. British Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology, 13, 245–255.
Kolko, G. (1963). The triumph of conservatism: A re-interpretation of
American history, 1900 –1916. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay epistemics and human knowledge: Cognitive and motivational basis. New York: Plenum.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1996). Motivated social cognition: Principles of the
interface. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles. New York: Guilford Press.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1999). Motivation, cognition, and reality: Three memos
for the next generation of research. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 54 –58.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Freund, T. (1983). The freezing and unfreezing of lay
inferences: Effects of impressional primacy, ethnic stereotyping, and
numerical anchoring. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 19,
448 – 468.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Thompson, E. P. (1999a). The illusory second mode
or, the cue is the message. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 182–193.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Thompson, E. P. (1999b). Persuasion by a single
route: A view from the unimodel. Psychological Inquiry, 10, 83–109.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1991). Group members’ reactions to
opinion deviates and conformists at varying degrees of proximity to
decision deadline and of environmental noise. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61, 215–225.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1996). Motivated closing of the
mind: “Seizing” and “freezing.” Psychological Review, 103, 263–283.
Kruglanski, A. W., Webster, D. M., & Klem, A. (1993). Motivated resistance and openness to persuasion in the presence or absence of prior
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 861–
876.
Krugman, P. (2002, April 23). The angry people. The New York Times, p.
A23.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 480 – 498.
Lane, R. E. (1962). The fear of equality. In R. E. Lane (Ed.), Political
ideology: Why the American common man believes what he does (pp.
57– 81). New York: Free Press.
*Lavine, H., Burgess, D., Snyder, M., Transue, J., Sullivan, J. L., Haney,
B., & Wagner, S. H. (1999). Threat, authoritarianism, and voting: An
investigation of personality and persuasion. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 337–347.
*Lavine, H., Polichak, J., & Lodge, M. (1999, September). Authoritarianism and threat: A response latency analysis. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the American Political Science Association, Atlanta,
GA.
Lehrer, J. (1997, July 23). The arts: A congress divided [Television
broadcast]. News hour. New York and Washington, DC: Public Broadcasting Service. (Transcript available from www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/
entertainment/july-dec97/nea_7–23. html)
Lennon, J. (1970). God. On Plastic Ono band [Record]. London: Northern
Songs.
Lentz, T. F. (1939). Personage admiration and other correlates of
conservatism-radicalism. Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 81–93.
Lerner, M. J. (1980). The belief in a just world: A fundamental delusion.
New York: Plenum Press.
Liberman, N., Idson, L. C., Camacho, C. J., & Higgins, E. T. (1999).
Promotion and prevention choices between stability and change. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1135–1145.
Lind, M. (1996). Up from conservatism: Why the right is wrong for
America. New York: Free Press.
Lipset, S. M. (1981). Working-class authoritarianism. In S. M. Lipset (Ed.),
Political man: The social bases of politics (pp. 87–126). Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press. (Original work published 1960)
Lo, C. Y. H., & Schwartz, M. (Eds.). (1998). Social policy and the
conservative agenda. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation and

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION
attitude polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37,
2098 –2109.
Loye, D. (1977). The leadership passion. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lyons, M., & Berlet, C. (1996). Too close for comfort: Right-wing populism, scapegoating, and Fascist potentials in U.S. politics. Boston: South
End Press.
Mannheim, K. (1936). Ideology and utopia. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Mannheim, K. (1986). Conservatism: A contribution to the sociology of
knowledge (D. Kettler, V. Meja, & N. Stehr, Trans.). New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. (Original work published 1927)
Martin, J., Scully, M., & Levitt, B. (1990). Injustice and the legitimation of
revolution: Damning the past, excusing the present, and neglecting the
future. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 281–290.
Martin, J. L. (2001). The Authoritarian Personality, 50 years later: What
lessons are there for political psychology? Political Psychology, 22,
1–26.
*McAllister, P., & Anderson, A. (1991). Conservatism and the comprehension of implausible texts. European Journal of Social Psychology,
21, 147–164.
*McCann, S. J. H. (1997). Threatening times, “strong” presidential popular
vote winners, and the victory margin, 1824 –1964. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 160 –170.
McClosky, H., & Zaller, J. (1984). The American ethos. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
McGregor, I., Zanna, M. P., Holmes, J. G., & Spencer, S. J. (2001).
Compensatory conviction in the face of personal uncertainty: Going to
extremes and being oneself. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 472– 488.
McGuire, W. J. (1985). Attitudes and attitude change. In G. Lindzey & E.
Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (pp. 233–346). New
York: Random House.
Mercer, W. G., & Cairns, E. (1981). Conservatism and its relationship to
general and specific ethnocentrism in Northern Ireland. British Journal
of Social Psychology, 20, 13–16.
Milburn, M. A. (1991). Persuasion and politics: The social psychology of
public opinion. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks-Cole/Wadsworth.
Miller, A. S. (1994). Dynamic indicators of self-perceived conservatism.
Sociological Quarterly, 35, 175–182.
Miller, D. T., & Ross, M. (1975). Self-serving biases in the attribution of
causality: Fact or fiction? Psychological Bulletin, 82, 213–225.
Morris, W. (Ed.). (1976). The American heritage dictionary of the English
language (New college ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Muller, J. Z. (2001). Conservatism: Historical aspects. In N. J. Smelser &
P. B. Baltes (Eds.), International encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences (pp. 2624 –2628). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Neilson, W. A. (Ed.). (1958). Webster’s new international dictionary of the
English language (2nd ed., unabridged). New York: Merriam.
*Nias, D. K. B. (1973). Attitudes to the common market: A case study in
conservatism. In G. D. Wilson (Ed.), The psychology of conservatism
(pp. 239 –255). New York: Academic Press.
O’Connor, P. (1952). Ethnocentrism, “intolerance of ambiguity,” and abstract reasoning ability. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 47,
526 –530.
Pawlicki, R. E., & Almquist, C. (1973). Authoritarianism, locus of control,
and tolerance of ambiguity as reflected in membership and nonmembership in a women’s liberation group. Psychological Reports, 32, 1331–
1337.
Peterson, B. E., Doty, R. M., & Winter, D. G. (1993). Authoritarianism and
attitudes toward contemporary social issues. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 19, 174 –184.
*Peterson, B. E., & Lane, M. D. (2001). Implications of authoritarianism
for young adulthood: Longitudinal analysis of college experiences and
future goals. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 678 – 690.
*Peterson, B. E., Smirles, K. A., & Wentworth, P. A. (1997). Generativity

373

and authoritarianism implications for personality, political involvement,
and parenting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1202–
1216.
*Pettigrew, T. F. (1958). The measurement and correlates of category
width as a cognitive variable. Journal of Personality, 26, 532–544.
Popper, K. R. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Harper.
Pratto, F. (1999). The puzzle of continuing group inequality: Piecing
together psychological, social, and cultural forces in social dominance
theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 31, 191–263.
*Pratto, F., Sidanius, J., Stallworth, L. M., & Malle, B. F. (1994). Social
dominance orientation: A personality variable predicting social and
political attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
741–763.
Ray, J. J. (1973). Conservatism, authoritarianism, and related variables: A
review and empirical study. In G. D. Wilson (Ed.), The psychology of
conservatism (pp. 17–35). New York: Academic Press.
Ray, J. J. (1988). Cognitive style as a predictor of authoritarianism,
conservatism, and racism: A fantasy in many movements. Political
Psychology, 9, 303–308.
Redding, R. E. (2001). Sociopolitical diversity in psychology: The case for
pluralism. American Psychologist, 56, 205–215.
Reich, W. (1970). The mass psychology of fascism (V. R. Carfagno,
Trans.). New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux. (Original work published
1946)
Rickert, E. J. (1998). Authoritarianism and economic threat: Implications
for political behavior. Political Psychology, 19, 707–720.
Robins, R. S., & Post, J. M. (1997). Political paranoia: The psychopolitics
of hatred. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Rohan, M. J., & Zanna, M. P. (1998). The “products of socialization”: A
discussion of self-regulatory strategies and value systems. In J. M.
Darley & J. Cooper (Eds.), Attribution and social interaction: The
legacy of Edward E. Jones. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Rokeach, M. (1956). Political and religious dogmatism: An alternative to
the authoritarian personality. Psychological Monographs, 70(18, Whole
No. 425), 43.
*Rokeach, M. (1960). The open and closed mind. New York: Basic Books.
Rorty, R. (1989). Contingency, irony, and solidarity. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
*Rosenblatt, A., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Pyszczynski, T., & Lyon, D.
(1989). Evidence for terror management theory: I. The effects of mortality salience on reactions to those who violate or uphold cultural
values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 681– 690.
Rosenthal, R. (1991). Meta-analytic procedures for social research (2nd
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rossiter, C. (1968). Conservatism. In D. Sills (Ed.), International encyclopedia of the social sciences (pp. 290 –295). New York: Macmillan &
Free Press.
*Sales, S. M. (1972). Economic threat as a determinant of conversion rates
in authoritarian and nonauthoritarian churches. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 23, 420 – 428.
*Sales, S. M. (1973). Threat as a factor in authoritarianism: An analysis of
archival data. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 44 –57.
Sales, S. M., & Friend, K. E. (1973). Success and failure as determinants
of level of authoritarianism. Behavioral Science, 18, 163–172.
Sanford, N. (1966). Self and society: Social change and individual development. New York: Atherton Press.
Sanger, D. E. (2001, July 25). On world stage, America’s president wins
mixed reviews. The New York Times, p. A1.
Sanger, D. E. (2002, April 8). Mideast turmoil: Assessment. The New York
Times, p. A6.
Schaller, M., Boyd, C., Yohannes, J., & O’Brien, N. (1995). The prejudiced personality revisited: Personal need for structure and formation of
erroneous group stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 544 –555.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

374

JOST, GLASER, KRUGLANSKI, AND SULLOWAY

Schimel, J., Simon, L., Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Solomon, S.,
Waxmonsky, J., & Arndt, J. (1999). Stereotypes and terror management:
Evidence that mortality salience enhances stereotypic thinking and preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 905–926.
Sears, D. O. (1983). The persistence of early political predispositions: The
roles of attitude object and life stage. In L. Wheeler & P. Shaver (Eds.),
Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 4, pp. 79 –116).
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Sears, D. O. (1986). College sophomores in the laboratory: Influence of a
narrow data base on social psychology’s view of human nature. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 515–530.
Sears, D. O. (1994). Ideological bias in political psychology: The view
from scientific hell. Political Psychology, 15, 547–556.
Sears, D. O., & Funk, C. L. (1991). The role of self-interest in social and
political attitudes. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 24,
1– 85.
Shah, J. Y., Kruglanski, A. W., & Thompson, E. P. (1998). Membership
has its (epistemic) rewards: Need for closure effects on in-group bias.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 383–393.
Shils, E. A. (1954). Authoritarianism: “Right” and “left.” In R. Christie &
M. Jahoda (Eds.), Studies in the scope and method of “The Authoritarian
Personality” (pp. 24 – 49). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
*Sidanius, J. (1978). Intolerance of ambiguity and socio-politico ideology:
A multidimensional analysis. European Journal of Social Psychology, 8,
215–235.
Sidanius, J. (1984). Political interest, political information search, and
ideological homogeneity as a function of sociopolitical ideology: A tale
of three theories. Human Relations, 37, 811– 828.
*Sidanius, J. (1985). Cognitive functioning and sociopolitical ideology
revisited. Political Psychology, 6, 637– 661.
Sidanius, J. (1988). Political sophistication and political deviance: A structural equation examination of context theory. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 55, 37–51.
Sidanius, J. (1993). The psychology of group conflict and the dynamics of
oppression: A social dominance perspective. In S. Iyengar & W. J.
McGuire (Eds.), Explorations in political psychology (pp. 183–219).
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Sidanius, J., & Ekehammar, B. (1979). Political socialization: A multivariate analysis of Swedish political attitude and preference data. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 9, 265–279.
Sidanius, J., & Lau, R. R. (1989). Political sophistication and political
deviance: A matter of context. Political Psychology, 10, 85–109.
Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1993). The inevitability of oppression and the
dynamics of social dominance. In P. Sniderman, P. E. Tetlock, & E. G.
Carmines (Eds.), Prejudice, politics, and the American dilemma (pp.
173–211). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999). Social dominance: An intergroup theory
of social hierarchy and oppression. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Sidanius, J., Pratto, F., & Bobo, L. (1996). Racism, conservatism, affirmative action, and intellectual sophistication: A matter of principled
conservatism or group dominance? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 70, 476 – 490.
Smith, M. R., & Gordon, R. A. (1998). Personal need for structure and
attitudes toward homosexuality. Journal of Social Psychology, 138,
83– 87.
*Smithers, A. G., & Lobley, D. M. (1978). Dogmatism, social attitudes and
personality. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 17,
135–142.
Sniderman, P. M., Piazza, T., Tetlock, P. E., & Kendrick, A. (1991). The
new racism. American Journal of Political Science, 35, 423– 645.
Sniderman, P. M., & Tetlock, P. E. (1986). Symbolic racism: Problems of
motive attribution in political analysis. Journal of Social Issues, 42,
129 –150.
Sorrentino, R. M., & Roney, C. J. R. (1986). Uncertainty orientation,

achievement-related motivation, and task diagnosticity as determinants
of task performance. Social Cognition, 4, 420 – 436.
Sorrentino, R. M., & Roney, C. J. R. (2000). The uncertain mind: Individual differences in facing the unknown. Philadelphia: Psychology
Press/Taylor & Francis.
Srull, T. K., & Wyer, R. S. (1979). The role of category accessibility in the
interpretation of information about persons: Some determinants and
implications. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1660 –
1672.
Stacey, B. G., & Green, R. T. (1971). Working-class conservatism: A
review and an empirical study. British Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology, 10, 10 –26.
Stone, I. F. (1989). In a time of torment (1961–1967). Boston: Little,
Brown.
Stone, W. F. (1980). The myth of left-wing authoritarianism. Political
Psychology, 2, 3–19.
Stone, W. F. (1986). Personality and ideology: Empirical support for
Tomkins’ polarity theory. Political Psychology, 7, 689 –708.
Stone, W. F., Lederer, G., & Christie, R. (Eds.). (1993). Strength and
weakness: The Authoritarian Personality today. New York: SpringerVerlag.
Stone, W. F., & Schaffner, P. E. (1988). The psychology of politics. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Strauman, T. J., & Higgins, E. T. (1988). Self-discrepancies as predictors
of vulnerability to distinct syndromes of chronic emotional distress.
Journal of Personality, 56, 685–707.
Sulloway, F. J. (1996). Born to rebel: Birth order, family dynamics, and
creative lives. New York: Pantheon.
Sulloway, F. J. (2001). Birth order, sibling competition, and human behavior. In H. R. Holcomb III (Ed.), Conceptual challenges in evolutionary psychology: Innovative research strategies (pp. 39 – 83). Dordrecht,
the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
*Tetlock, P. E. (1983). Cognitive style and political ideology. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 118 –126.
*Tetlock, P. E. (1984). Cognitive style and political belief systems in the
British House of Commons. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 365–375.
Tetlock, P. E. (1994). Political psychology or politicized psychology: Is the
road to scientific hell paved with good moral intentions? Political
Psychology, 15, 509 –529.
*Tetlock, P. E., Bernzweig, J., & Gallant, J. L. (1985). Supreme Court
decision making: Cognitive style as a predictor of ideological consistency of voting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48,
1227–1239.
*Tetlock, P. E., Hannum, K. A., & Micheletti, P. M. (1984). Stability and
change in the complexity of senatorial debate: Testing the cognitive
versus rhetorical style hypotheses. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 46, 979 –990.
Tetlock, P. E., & Mitchell, G. (1993). Liberal and conservative approaches
to justice: Conflicting psychological portraits. In B. A. Mellers & J.
Baron (Eds.), Psychological perspectives on justice (pp. 234 –255).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Thomas, D. B. (1976). Exploring the personality-ideology interface: Q-sort
of Tomkins’ polarity theory. Experimental Study of Politics, 5, 47– 87.
Tomkins, S. S. (1963). Left and right: A basic dimension of ideology and
personality. In R. W. White (Ed.), The study of lives (pp. 388 – 411).
Chicago: Atherton.
Tomkins, S. S. (1965). Affect and the psychology of knowledge. In S. S.
Tomkins & C. E. Izard (Eds.), Affect, cognition, and personality: Empirical studies (pp. 72–97). New York: Springer.
Tomkins, S. S. (1987). Script theory. In J. Aronoff & A. I. Rubin (Eds.),
The emergence of personality (pp. 147–216). New York: Springer.
Tomkins, S. S. (1988). Polarity Scale. In W. F. Stone & P. E. Schaffner
(Eds.), The psychology of politics (pp. 292–298). New York: SpringerVerlag. (Original, unpublished work developed 1964)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

CONSERVATISM AS MOTIVATED SOCIAL COGNITION
Tomkins, S. S. (1995). Ideology and affect. In E. V. Demos (Ed.), Exploring affect: The selected writings of Silvan S. Tomkins (pp. 109 –167).
New York: University of Cambridge Press.
Turner, J. C. (1991). Social influence. Buckingham, England: Open University Press.
van den Bos, K., & Miedema, J. (2000). Toward understanding why
fairness matters: The influence of mortality salience on reactions to
procedural fairness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79,
355–366.
*Webster, A. C., & Stewart, R. A. C. (1973). Theological conservatism. In
G. D. Wilson (Ed.), The psychology of conservatism (pp. 129 –147).
London: Academic Press.
Webster, D. M. (1993). Motivated augmentation and reduction of the
overattribution bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65,
261–271.
Webster, D. M. (1994). Groups under the influence: Need for closure
effects on the use of shared and unique information. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland at College Park.
*Webster, D. M., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1994). Individual differences in
need for cognitive closure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 1049 –1062.
Webster, D. M., Richter, L., & Kruglanski, A. W. (1996). On leaping to
conclusions when feeling tired: Mental fatigue effects on impressional
primacy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 181–195.
Whitley, B. E., Jr. (1999). Right-wing authoritarianism, social dominance
orientation, and prejudice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 126 –134.
Whitley, B. E., Jr., & Lee, S. E. (2000). The relationship of authoritarian-

375

ism and related constructs to attitudes toward homosexuality. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 30, 144 –170.
Will, G. F. (1998). Bunts. New York: Scribner.
Williams, S. (1984). Left–right ideological differences in blaming victims.
Political Psychology, 5, 573–581.
Wilson, G. D. (1968). Authoritarianism or conservatism? Papers in Psychology, 2, 58.
Wilson, G. D. (1973a). Development and evaluation of the C-Scale. In
G. D. Wilson (Ed.), The psychology of conservatism (pp. 49 – 69).
London: Academic Press.
Wilson, G. D. (1973b). A dynamic theory of conservatism. In G. D. Wilson
(Ed.), The psychology of conservatism (pp. 257–265). London: Academic Press.
Wilson, G. D. (Ed.). (1973c). The psychology of conservatism. London:
Academic Press.
*Wilson, G. D. (1973d). The temperamental basis of attitudes. In G. D.
Wilson (Ed.), The psychology of conservatism (pp. 187–196). London:
Academic Press.
*Wilson, G. D., Ausman, J., & Mathews, T. R. (1973). Conservatism and
art preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 25,
286 –288.
Wilson, G. D., & Patterson, J. R. (1968). A new measure of conservatism.
British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 8, 264 –269.

Received July 22, 1999
Revision received August 20, 2002
Accepted August 20, 2002 䡲

