Contemporary Educational Psychology 25, 82–91, (2000)
doi:10.1006/ceps.1999.1016, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Self-Efficacy: An Essential Motive to Learn
Barry J. Zimmerman
Graduate School and University Center of City University of New York
During the past two decades, self-efficacy has emerged as a highly effective predictor of students’ motivation and learning. As a performance-based measure of
perceived capability, self-efficacy differs conceptually and psychometrically from
related motivational constructs, such as outcome expectations, self-concept, or locus
of control. Researchers have succeeded in verifying its discriminant validity as well
as convergent validity in predicting common motivational outcomes, such as students’ activity choices, effort, persistence, and emotional reactions. Self-efficacy
beliefs have been found to be sensitive to subtle changes in students’ performance
context, to interact with self-regulated learning processes, and to mediate students’
academic achievement.  2000 Academic Press

Educators have long recognized that students’ beliefs about their academic
capabilities play an essential role in their motivation to achieve, but selfconceptions regarding academic performance initially proved difficult to
measure in a scientifically valid way. Initial efforts to study students’ selfbeliefs gave little attention to the role of environmental influences, such as
specific features of performance contexts or domains of academic functioning. In the late 1970s, a number of researchers began to assess self-beliefs
in a more task-specific way, and one of the most important of these efforts
focused on self-efficacy. In 1977(a) Bandura proposed a theory of the origins,
mediating mechanisms, and diverse effects of beliefs of personal efficacy,
and he provided guidelines for measurement of self-efficacy beliefs for different domains of functioning. In the present article, I define self-efficacy
and distinguish it from related conceptions in the literature, describe its role
in academic motivation and learning (with special attention to students’ capabilities to regulate their own learning activities), and discuss its susceptibility
to instruction and other social-cultural influences. Because of space limitations, I cite only key studies and do not consider other issues such as theoretiI express my gratitude to Frank Pajares and Manuel Martinez-Pons for their helpful comments on an earlier draft of this article.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Barry J. Zimmerman, Educational psychology Program, CUNY Graduate School, 365 Fifth Ave., New York, NY 10016-4309.
82
0361-476X/00 $35.00

Copyright  2000 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

SELF-EFFICACY BELIEFS

83

cal controversies or gender differences in self-efficacy. For comprehensive
reviews of research on academic self-efficacy, I recommend Bandura (1997),
Pajares (1996b, 1997), Schunk (1989), and Zimmerman (1995).
SELF-EFFICACY AND ITS DIMENSIONS

Before Bandura (1977a) introduced self-efficacy as a key component in
social cognitive theory, he discussed human motivation primarily in terms
of outcome expectations. However, during the treatment of phobic individuals with mastery modeling techniques, individual differences in generalization were found regardless of the fact that all subjects could successfully
interact with the target of their fear (e.g., touch a snake or dog) without
adverse consequences at the end of therapy. Although the subjects developed
a strong outcome expectancy that proper techniques (e.g., for handling a
snake or dog) would protect them from adverse consequences (such as biting), they still differed in their perceived capabilities to use the techniques
outside the therapeutic setting. Bandura labeled this individual difference
self-efficacy and sought to measure it using task-specific scales. Although
self-efficacy and outcome expectations were both hypothesized to affect motivation, he suggested that self-efficacy would play a larger role because ‘‘the
types of outcomes people anticipate depend largely on their judgments of
how well they will be able to perform in given situations’’ (Bandura, 1986,
p. 392).
Bandura (1977a, 1997) formally defined perceived self-efficacy as personal judgments of one’s capabilities to organize and execute courses of
action to attain designated goals, and he sought to assess its level, generality,
and strength across activities and contexts. The level of self-efficacy refers
to its dependence on the difficulty of a particular task, such as spelling words
of increasing difficulty; generality pertains to the transferability of self-efficacy beliefs across activities, such as from algebra to statistics; strength of
perceived efficacy is measured by the amount of one’s certainty about performing a given task. These properties of self-efficacy judgments are measured using questionnaire items that are task specific, vary in difficulty, and
capture degrees of confidence (e.g., from 0 to 100%).
With regard to their content, self-efficacy measures focus on performance
capabilities rather than on personal qualities, such as one’s physical or psychological characteristics. Respondents judge their capabilities to fulfill
given task demands, such as solving fraction problems in arithmetic, not who
they are personally or how they feel about themselves in general. Self-efficacy beliefs are not a single disposition but rather are multidimensional in
form and differ on the basis of the domain of functioning. For example,
efficacy beliefs about performing on a history test may differ from beliefs
about a biology examination. Self-efficacy measures are also designed to be

84

BARRY J. ZIMMERMAN

sensitive to variations in performance context, such as learning in a noisy
lounge compared to the quietude of the library. In addition, perceptions of
efficacy depend on a mastery criterion of performance rather than on normative or other criteria. For example, students rate their certainty about solving
a crossword puzzle of a particular difficulty level, not how well they expect
to do on the puzzle in comparison to other students. Finally, self-efficacy
judgments specifically refer to future functioning and are assessed before
students perform the relevant activities. This antecedent property positions
self-efficacy judgments to play a causal role in academic motivation.
SELF-EFFICACY AND RELATED BELIEFS

Self-efficacy beliefs differ conceptually and psychometrically from
closely related constructs, such as outcome expectations, self-concept, and
perceived control. The conceptual distinction that Bandura (1986) drew between academic self-efficacy and outcome expectancies was studied psychometrically in research on reading and writing achievement. Shell, Murphy,
and Bruning (1989) measured self-efficacy in terms of perceived capability
to perform various reading and writing activities, and they assessed outcome
expectancies regarding the value of these activities in attaining various outcomes in employment, social pursuits, family life, education, and citizenship.
Efficacy beliefs and outcome expectancies jointly predicted 32% of the variance in reading achievement, with perceived efficacy accounting for virtually
all the variance. Only perceived self-efficacy was a significant predictor of
writing achievement. These results not only show the discriminant validity
of self-efficacy measures, they support Bandura’s contention that self-efficacy plays a larger role than outcome expectancies in motivation.
One of closest constructs to self-efficacy is self-concept. The latter belief
is a more general self-descriptive construct that incorporates many forms
of self-knowledge and self-evaluative feelings (Marsh & Shavelson, 1985).
Historically, self-concept was defined by phenomenologists (e.g., Rogers,
1951) as a global perception of oneself and one’s self-esteem reactions to
that self-perception, but this global measure of self-belief was not found to be
related consistently to students’ academic performance (Hattie, 1992; Wylie,
1968). Perhaps as a result, a number of theorists (e.g., Harter, 1978; Marsh &
Shavelson, 1985) reconceptualized self-concept as a hierarchical construct,
with a global self-concept at the apex of a self-hierarchy but added subcategories such as academic self-concept in the middle of the hierarchy and academic domain-specific self-concepts at the bottom. The latter self-concept
measures emphasize self-esteem reactions by posing self-evaluative questions, such as ‘‘How good are you a in English?’’ By contrast, self-efficacy
items focus exclusively on task-specific performance expectations, such as
‘‘How certain are you that you can diagram this sentence?’’ Although prior
task reactions and future performance expectations are often correlated,

SELF-EFFICACY BELIEFS

85

Bandura (1997) notes it is possible conceptually to have high self-efficacy
about a capability that one does not particularly esteem as well as the reverse.
There is growing evidence that, although self-efficacy beliefs are correlated with domain-specific self-concepts, self-efficacy measures offer predictive advantages when a task is familiar and can be specified precisely.
For example, Pajares and Miller (1994) used path analysis procedures to
examine the predictive and mediational roles of these two constructs in mathematical problem solving by college students. Math self-efficacy was more
predictive of problem solving than was math self-concept or, for that matter,
perceived usefulness of mathematics, prior experience with mathematics, or
gender. The effect of prior math experiences on math problem solving was
mediated primarily by self-efficacy beliefs, but self-concept played a small
but significant role. Thus, when self-concept and self-efficacy beliefs are
both included in regression equations, self-efficacy beliefs display discriminant validity by independently predicting future academic achievement. Although self-efficacy questionnaire items should be adapted to specific tasks,
the scope of these tasks can vary on the basis of the user’s intended purpose,
ranging from proficiency in an academic domain (e.g., writing or mathematics) to proficiency in a subskill (e.g., grammar or fractions). This second
criterion for developing self-efficacy measures involves their correspondence to the performance capability in question. Pajares (1996a) demonstrated that the predictiveness of self-efficacy measures increases as a function of both their specificity and correspondence to a skill. Thus, self-efficacy
differs from self-concept in both its specificity and correspondence to varying performance tasks and contexts.
Another closely associated construct to self-efficacy is perceived control,
which emerged from research on locus of control (Rotter, 1966). Perceived
control refers to general expectancies about whether outcomes are controlled
by one’s behavior or by external forces, and it is theorized that an internal
locus of control should support self-directed courses of action, whereas an
external locus of control should discourage them. Locus-of-control scales
are neither task nor domain specific in their item content but rather refer to
general beliefs about the internality or externality of causality. Bandura
(1986) has questioned the value of general control beliefs because students
may feel anxious about controlling one type of subject matter or performance
setting (e.g., solving mathematical problems in a limited time period) but
not others. In support of this contention, Smith (1989) found that locus of
control measures did not predict improvements in academic performance
or reductions in anxiety in highly self-anxious students who underwent an
intensive coping skills training program, but self-efficacy scales did predict
such improvements.
In summary, measures of self-efficacy are not only conceptually distinctive from closely associated constructs such as outcome expectancies, self-

86

BARRY J. ZIMMERMAN

concept, and perceived control, they have discriminant validity in predicting
a variety of academic outcomes.
ROLE OF SELF-EFFICACY IN ACADEMIC MOTIVATION

Self-efficacy beliefs have also shown convergent validity in influencing
such key indices of academic motivation as choice of activities, level of
effort, persistence, and emotional reactions. There is evidence (Bandura,
1997) that self-efficacious students participate more readily, work harder,
persist longer, and have fewer adverse emotional reactions when they encounter difficulties than do those who doubt their capabilities.
In terms of choice of activities, self-efficacious students undertake difficult
and challenging tasks more readily than do inefficacious students. Bandura
and Schunk (1981) found that students’ mathematical self-efficacy beliefs
were predictive of their choice of engaging in subtraction problems rather
than in a different type of task: The higher the children’s sense of efficacy,
the greater their choice of the arithmetic activity. Zimmerman and Kitsantas
(1997; 1999) also found self-efficacy to be highly correlated with students’
rated intrinsic interest in a motoric learning task as well as in a writing revision task. Furthermore, measures of self-efficacy correlate significantly with
students’ choice of majors in college, success in course work, and perseverance (Hackett & Betz, 1989; Lent, Brown, & Larkin, 1984).
Self-efficacy beliefs are predictive of two measures of students’ effort:
rate of performance and expenditure of energy. For example, Schunk and
colleagues found that perceived self-efficacy for learning correlates positively with students’ rate of solution of arithmetic problems (Schunk & Hanson, 1985; Schunk, Hanson, & Cox, 1987). Salomon (1984) has found that
self-efficacy is positively related to self-rated mental effort and achievement
during students’ learning from text material that was perceived as difficult.
Regarding the effects of perceived self-efficacy on persistence, path analyses
have shown that it influences students’ skill acquisition both directly and
indirectly by increasing their persistence (Schunk, 1981). The direct effect
indicates that perceived self-efficacy influences students’ methods of learning as well as their motivational processes. These results validate the mediational role that self-efficacy plays in motivating persistence and academic
achievement. In a meta-analytic review of nearly 70 studies of persistence
and rate measures of motivation, Multon, Brown, and Lent (1991) found a
significant positive effect size of students’ self-efficacy beliefs.
Student’s beliefs about their efficacy to manage academic task demands
can also influence them emotionally by decreasing their stress, anxiety, and
depression (Bandura, 1997). For example, Pajares and Kranzler (1995) have
studied the relationship between self-efficacy and students’ anxiety reactions
regarding mathematics. Although the two measures were negatively correlated, only self-efficacy was predictive of mathematics performance when

SELF-EFFICACY BELIEFS

87

compared in a joint path analysis. There is also evidence that students’ performance in academically threatening situations depends more on efficacy
beliefs than on anxiety arousal. Siegel, Galassi, and Ware (1985) found that
self-efficacy beliefs are more predictive of math performance than is math
anxiety. The strength of efficacy beliefs accounted for more than 13% of the
variance in their final math grades, whereas math anxiety did not prove to
be a significant predictor. These studies provide clear evidence of the discriminant and predictive validity of self-efficacy measures, and they suggest
particular benefit if educators focus on fostering a positive sense of personal
efficacy rather than merely diminishing scholastic anxiety.
SELF-EFFICACY AND SELF-REGULATION OF LEARNING

Self-efficacy beliefs also provide students with a sense of agency to motivate their learning through use of such self-regulatory processes as goal setting, self-monitoring, self-evaluation, and strategy use. For example, there
is evidence (Zimmerman, Bandura, & Martinez-Pons, 1992) that the more
capable students judge themselves to be, the more challenging the goals they
embrace. When self-efficacy and personal goal setting from the beginning
of a school term were used jointly to predict final course grades in high
school social studies, they increased prediction by 31% over a measure of
prior grades in social studies. Similarly, when self-efficacy and personal goal
setting were compared with the verbal subscale of the Scholastic Aptitude
Test, there was an increase of 35% in predicting college students’ final grades
in a writing course (Zimmerman & Bandura, 1994). Although prior course
grades and general measures of ability are considered exemplary predictors
of achievement, these studies demonstrated that self-efficacy beliefs and goal
setting add significantly to the predictiveness of these measures.
The effects of efficacy beliefs on students’ self-monitoring was studied
during concept learning (Bouffard-Bouchard, Parent, & Larivee, 1991). Efficacious students were better at monitoring their working time, more persistent, less likely to reject correct hypotheses prematurely, and better at solving
conceptual problems than inefficacious students of equal ability. Self-efficacy beliefs also affect the self-evaluation standards students use to judge the
outcomes of their self-monitoring. In a path analytic study (Zimmerman &
Bandura, 1994), self-efficacy for writing beliefs significantly predicted college students’ personal standards for the quality of writing considered selfsatisfying as well as their goal setting and writing proficiency. Self-efficacy
beliefs also motivate students’ use of learning strategies. With fifth, eighth,
and eleventh grade students, there were developmental increases in perceived
verbal and mathematical efficacy as well as strategy use, and there was a
substantial relation (16 to 18% shared variance) between efficacy beliefs
and strategy use across the three grade levels of schooling (Zimmerman &
Martinez-Pons, 1990).

88

BARRY J. ZIMMERMAN

The greater motivation and self-regulation of learning of self-efficacious
students produces higher academic achievement according to a range of measures. Multon, Brown, and Lent (1991) found an overall effect size of .38,
indicating that self-efficacy accounted for approximately 14% of the variance
in students’ academic performance across a variety of student samples, experimental designs, and criterion measures. This represents further evidence
of the convergent validity of self-efficacy beliefs.
INSTRUCTIONAL AND SOCIAL INFLUENCES ON SELF-EFFICACY
BELIEFS

In contrast to trait measures of self-perceptions, self-efficacy indices focus
on cognitive beliefs that are readily influenced by four types of experience:
enactive attainment, vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, and physiological states. Enactive experiences are the most influential source of efficacy
belief because they are predicated on the outcomes of personal experiences,
whereas vicarious influences depend on an observer’s self-comparison with
as well as outcomes attained by a model. If a model is viewed as more able
or talented, observers will discount the relevance of the model’s performance
outcomes for themselves. Verbal persuasion has an even more limited impact
on students’ self-efficacy because outcomes are described, not directly witnessed, and thus depend on the credibility of the persuader. Finally, students
base their self-efficacy judgments on their perceived physiological reactions,
such as fatigue, stress, and other emotions that are often interpreted as indicators of physical incapability. Unlike self-beliefs assumed to have trait-like
stability across time and setting, self-efficacy is assumed to be responsive
to changes in personal context and outcomes, whether experienced directly,
vicariously, verbally, or physiologically. As a result of this sensitivity, selfefficacy beliefs are studied as indicators of change during instructional interventions as well as indicators of initial individual differences.
To facilitate improvements in perceived efficacy, researchers have trained
students with learning and motivational deficiencies by modeling specific
self-regulatory techniques, describing their form, and providing enactive
feedback regarding their impact. For example, youngsters who observed an
adult model the use a cognitive strategy had significantly higher levels of
perceived efficacy and academic skills than youngsters who received didactic
instruction (Schunk, 1981). Asking students to set proximal goals enhanced
self-efficacy and skill development more effectively than asking them to set
distal goals because the proximal attainments provide evidence of growing
capability (Bandura & Schunk, 1981). Verbally encouraging students to set
their own goals improved not only their efficacy beliefs and achievement
but also their commitment to attaining the goals (Schunk, 1985). The frequency and immediacy of enactive feedback also created higher perceptions
of personal efficacy (Schunk, 1983). When students were taught to attribute

SELF-EFFICACY BELIEFS

89

their enactive feedback to effort, they perceived greater progress, maintained
higher motivation, and reported greater efficacy for further learning (Schunk,
1987). In these investigations, Schunk and his colleagues not only demonstrated the sensitivity of efficacy beliefs to instructional interventions, but
also the mediational role of these beliefs in explaining changes in learners’
self-regulation and achievement outcomes (Berry, 1987; Schunk, 1981).
Self-efficacy beliefs increased prediction of academic outcomes as much as
25% of the variance above instructional influences. Clearly, students’ selfefficacy beliefs are responsive to changes in instructional experience and
play a causal role in students’ development and use of academic competencies.
CONCLUSION

Students’ self-perceptions of efficacy are distinctive from related motivational constructs because of their specificity and close correspondence to
performance tasks. These cognitive beliefs differ conceptually and psychometrically from trait self-belief measures due to their sensitivity to variations
in experience and task and situational context. Two decades of research have
clearly established the validity of self-efficacy as a predictor of students’
motivation and learning. Although self-efficacy correlates with other related
constructs, it has also shown discriminant validity by its unique predictiveness of these outcomes when included in multiple regression analyses. It has
shown convergent validity in predicting diverse forms of motivation, such
as students’ activity choices, effort, persistence, and emotional reactions. Finally, when studied as a mediating variable in training studies, self-efficacy
has proven to be responsive to improvements in students’ methods of learning (especially those involving greater self-regulation) and predictive of
achievement outcomes. This empirical evidence of its role as a potent mediator of students’ learning and motivation confirms the historic wisdom of
educators that students’ self-beliefs about academic capabilities do play an
essential role in their motivation to achieve.
REFERENCES
Bandura, A. (1977a). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavior change. Psychological Review, 84, 191–215.
Bandura, A. (1977b). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice–Hall.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice–Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. H. (1981). Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and intrinsic
interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
41, 586–598.

90

BARRY J. ZIMMERMAN

Berry, J. M. (1987, September). A self-efficacy model of memory performance. Paper presented
at the meeting of the American Psychological Association, New York.
Bouffard-Bouchard, T., Parent, S., & Larivee, S. (1991). Influence of self-efficacy on selfregulation and performance among junior and senior high-school age students. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 14, 153–164.
Hackett, G., & Betz, N. E. (1989). An exploration of the mathematics self-efficacy/mathematics performance correspondence. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 20,
263–271.
Harter, S. (1978). Effectance motivation reconsidered: Toward a developmental model. Human
Development, 21, 34–64.
Hattie, J. (1992). Self-concept. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Larking, K. C. (1984). Relation of self-efficacy expectations
to academic achievement and persistence. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 31, 356–
362.
Marsh, H. W., & Shavelson, R. (1985). Self-concept: Its multifaceted, hierarchical structure.
Educational Psychologist, 20, 107–123.
Multon, K. D., Brown, S. D., & Lent, R. W. (1991). Relation of self-efficacy beliefs to academic outcomes: A meta-analytic investigation. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 18,
30–38.
Pajares, F. (1996a, April). Assessing self-efficacy beliefs and academic outcomes: The case for
specificity and correspondence. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, New York.
Pajares, F. (1996b). Self-efficacy beliefs in academic settings. Review of Educational Research, 66, 543–578.
Pajares, F., & Miller, M. D. (1994). Role of self-efficacy and self-concept beliefs in mathematical problem solving: A path analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 193–203.
Pajares, F., & Kranzler, J. (1995). Self-efficacy beliefs and general mental ability in mathematical problem-solving. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 20, 426–443.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy: Its current practice, implications, and theory.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, 148–154.
Salomon, G. (1984). Television is ‘‘easy’’ and print is ‘‘tough’’: The differential investment
of mental effort in learning as a function of perceptions and attributions. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 647–658.
Schunk, D. H. (1981). Modeling and attributional feedback effects on children’s achievement:
A self-efficacy analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 93–105.
Schunk, D. H. (1983). Progress self-monitoring: Effects on children’s self-efficacy and
achievement. Journal of Experimental Education, 51, 89–93.
Schunk, D. H. (1985). Self-efficacy and classroom learning. Psychology in the Schools, 22,
208–223.
Schunk, D. H. (1987). Peer models and children’s behavioral change. Review of Educational
Research, 57, 149–174.
Schunk, D. H. (1989). Self-efficacy and achievement behaviors. Educational Psychology Review, 1, 173–208.
Schunk, D. H., & Hanson, A. R. (1985). Peer models: Influence on children’s self-efficacy
and achievement behaviors. Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 313–322.

SELF-EFFICACY BELIEFS

91

Schunk, D. H., Hanson, A. R., & Cox, P. D. (1987). Peer model attributes and children’s
achievement behaviors. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 54–61.
Shell, D. F., Murphy, C. C., & Bruning, R. H. (1989). Self-efficacy and outcome expectancy
mechanisms in reading and writing achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81,
91–100.
Siegel, R. G., Galassi, J. P., & Ware, W. B. (1985). A comparison of two models for predicting
mathematics performance: Social learning versus math aptitude-anxiety. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 32, 531–538.
Smith, R. E. (1989). Effects of coping skills training on generalized self-efficacy and locus
of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 228–233.
Wylie, R. (1968). The present status of self-theory. In E. Borgotta & W. Lambert (Eds.),
Handbook of personality theory and research (pp. 728–787). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Zimmerman, B. J. (1995). Self-efficacy and educational development. In A. Bandura (Ed.),
Self-efficacy in changing societies (pp. 202–231). New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Bandura, A. (1994). Impact of self-regulatory influences on writing
course attainment. American Educational Research Journal, 31, 845–862.
Zimmerman, B. J., Bandura, A., & Martinez-Pons, M.. (1992). Self-motivation for academic
attainment: The role of self-efficacy beliefs and personal goal setting. American Educational Research Journal, 29, 663–676.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (1997). Developmental phases in self-regulation: Shifting
from process to outcome goals. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 29–36.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (1999). Acquiring writing revision skill: Shifting from
process to outcome self-regulatory goals. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 1–10.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1990). Student differences in self-regulated learning.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 51–59.

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

