Cornell University ILR School

DigitalCommons@ILR
Articles and Chapters

ILR Collection

Summer 2003

Entrepreneurial Motivation
Scott Shane
University of Maryland

Edwin A. Locke
University of Maryland

Christopher J. Collins
Cornell University, cjc53@cornell.edu

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/articles
Part of the Entrepreneurial and Small Business Operations Commons, Human Resources
Management Commons, and the Labor Relations Commons
Thank you for downloading an article from DigitalCommons@ILR.
Support this valuable resource today!
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the ILR Collection at DigitalCommons@ILR. It has been accepted for inclusion in Articles
and Chapters by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@ILR. For more information, please contact hlmdigital@cornell.edu.

Entrepreneurial Motivation
Abstract

Recent research on entrepreneurship has focused largely on macro-level environmental forces. Although
researchers adopting this focus have rightly criticized much of the existing empirical research on the role of
human motivation in entrepreneurship, we believe that the development of entrepreneurship theory requires
consideration of the motivations of people making entrepreneurial decisions. To provide a road map for
researchers interested in this area, we discuss the major motivations that prior researchers have suggested
should influence the entrepreneurial process, as well as suggest some motivations that are less commonly
studied in this area. In addition to outlining the major reasons for exploring these motivations, we identify the
major weaknesses that have limited the predictive power of previous research on this topic. We offer explicit
solutions for future research to adopt to overcome these problems.
Keywords

entrepreneurship, motivation, decision-making
Disciplines

Entrepreneurial and Small Business Operations | Human Resources Management | Labor Relations
Comments

Suggested Citation
Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. (2012). Entrepreneurial motivation [Electronic version]. Retrieved
[insert date], from Cornell University, ILR School site: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/articles/830
Required Publisher Statement
© Elsevier. Reprinted with permission. All rights reserved. Final version published as: Shane, S., Locke, E. A.,
& Collins, C. J. (2012). Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource Management Review, 13(2), 257-279.

This article is available at DigitalCommons@ILR: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/articles/830

Entrepreneurial Motivation
Scott Shane, Edwin A. Locke, Christopher J. Collins
Recent research on entrepreneurship has focused largely on macro-level environmental forces
[Aldrich, H. (2000). Organizations evolving. Beverly Hills: Sage] and the characteristics of
entrepreneurial opportunities [Christiansen, C. (1997). The innovators dilemma. Cambridge:
Harvard Business School Press]. Although researchers adopting this focus have rightly
criticized much of the existing empirical research on the role of human motivation in
entrepreneurship [Aldrich, H., & Zimmer, C. (1986). Entrepreneurship through social
networks. In D. Sexton & R. Smilor (Eds.), The art and science of entrepreneurship (pp. 3–23).
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger; Adm. Sci. Q. 32 (1987) 570], we believe that the development of
entrepreneurship theory requires consideration of the motivations of people making
entrepreneurial decisions. To provide a road map for researchers interested in this area, we
discuss the major motivations that prior researchers have suggested should influence the
entrepreneurial process, as well as suggest some motivations that are less commonly studied
in this area. In addition to outlining the major reasons for exploring these motivations, we
identify the major weaknesses that have limited the predictive power of previous research on
this topic. We offer explicit solutions for future research to adopt to overcome these problems.
Introduction
It is often said that a person cannot win a game that they do not play. In the context
of entrepreneurship, this statement suggests that success depends on people’s willingness
to become entrepreneurs. Moreover, because the pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunity is
an evolutionary process in which people select out at many steps along the way, decisions
made after the discovery of opportunities—to positively evaluate opportunities, to pursue
resources, and to design the mechanisms of exploitation—also depend on the willingness
of people to ‘‘play’’ the game. In this paper, we argue that human motivations influence
these decisions, and that variance across people in these motivations will influence who
pursues entrepreneurial opportunities, who assembles resources, and how people
undertake the entrepreneurial process.
In recent years, entrepreneurship research has focused largely on the
environmental characteristics influencing firm-foundings (Aldrich, 2000) and the
characteristics of entrepreneurial opportunities (Christiansen, 1997). Although this focus
has greatly enhanced our understanding of the entrepreneurial phenomenon, it ignores the
role of human agency. Entrepreneurship depends on the decisions that people make about
how to undertake that process. We argue that the attributes of people making decisions
about the entrepreneurial process influence the decisions that they make. Although
previous researchers have rightly criticized much of the existing empirical research on the
role of human motivation in entrepreneurship (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986; Carroll &
Mosakowski, 1987), we argue that inadequate empirical work does not negate the
importance of understanding the role of human motivation in the entrepreneurial process.
In fact, even sociologists who have argued strongly against the usefulness of trait-based

research in entrepreneurship implicitly acknowledge that motivation must matter to this
process. Aldrich and Zimmer (1986, p. 3), for example, write, entrepreneurial activity ‘‘can
be conceptualized as a function of opportunity structures and motivated entrepreneurs
with access to resources’’ (italics added).
We also believe that these criticisms have resulted in insufficient consideration of
the role of the human motivation in the entrepreneurial process in recent
entrepreneurship research. Consequently, we are left with theories of entrepreneurship
that do not consider variation in the motivations of different people. We believe that such
an omission is problematic because, as Baumol (1968, p. 66) eloquently argued, the study
of entrepreneurship that does not explicitly consider entrepreneurs is like the analysis of
Shakespeare in which ‘‘the Prince of Denmark has been expunged from the discussion of
Hamlet.’’
In this article, we identify several human motivations that influence the
entrepreneurial process. In our arguments, we explicitly assume that all human action is
the result of both motivational and cognitive factors, the latter including ability,
intelligence, and skills (Locke, 2000a). We also assume that entrepreneurship is not solely
the result of human action; external factors also play a role (e.g., the status of the economy,
the availability of venture capital, the actions of competitors, and government regulations).
However, environmental factors being held constant, we argue that human motivation
plays a critical role in the entrepreneurial process. To this end, we suggest ways that
researchers could develop more realistic explanations for how human motivation
influences the entrepreneurial process than is the norm in the literature to date. We believe
that this approach could overcome many of the criticisms of prior research on personcentric explanations for entrepreneurship. Finally, we offer suggestions on how empirical
researchers should test these arguments in ways that overcome many of the criticisms of
extant research on this topic.
Our article proceeds as follows: In the second section, we define entrepreneurship
and present several arguments for why the study of entrepreneurship in general and
consideration of the role of human motivation in the process in particular are important. In
the third section, we discuss opposing views of how opportunities may affect the
relationship between motivation and entrepreneurship. In the fourth section, we
summarize the major mechanisms by which previous researchers believe motivation
influences entrepreneurship. In the fifth section, we identify what we believe are the major
problems with prior research on motivation and entrepreneurship. In the sixth section, we
provide some recommendations for researchers conducting empirical research in this area.
In the final section, we offer some tentative conclusions about motivation and
entrepreneurship.
What is entrepreneurship and why study it from the point of view of human
motivation?

We believe that the study of the entrepreneurial process is important for several
reasons. First, entrepreneurship drives innovation and technical change, and therefore
generates economic growth (Schumpeter, 1934). Second, as the Austrian economists have
explained, entrepreneurial action is the process through which supply and demand are
equilibrated (Kirzner, 1997). Third, entrepreneurship is an important process by which

new knowledge is converted into products and services (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000).
Fourth, entrepreneurship has become an important vocation and we need to understand its
role in the development of human and intellectual capital (Zahra & Dess, 2001).
In this article, we adopt Shane and Venkataraman’s (2000, p. 218) definition of
entrepreneurship as the process by which ‘‘opportunities to create future goods and
services are discovered, evaluated, and exploited.’’ As these authors have explained, this
definition does not require viewing entrepreneurs as the founders of new organizations. 1
An options trader can be an entrepreneur, as can a corporate salesman who discovers and
pursues opportunities for the creation of new products. 2 Moreover, this definition shows
that entrepreneurship is a creative process. By rearranging resources in a new way,
entrepreneurs engage in creative activity. However, the degree of creativity involved in
entrepreneurship varies across the types of resource recombination that occurs. For
example, the creation of business to undertake space tourism may be more creative than
the creation of a new restaurant in a strip mall.
Entrepreneurship involves human agency. The entrepreneurial process occurs
because people act to pursue opportunities. People differ in their willingness and abilities
to act on these opportunities because they are different from each other. We argue that the
variation among people in their willingness and ability to act has important effects on the
entrepreneurial process.
Recent research has been relatively accepting of arguments that people vary in their
willingness and ability to engage in the entrepreneurial process because of nonmotivational individual differences. Researchers have shown that the willingness of people
to pursue entrepreneurial opportunities depends on such things as their opportunity cost
(Amit, Meuller, & Cockburn, 1995), their stocks of financial capital (Evans & Leighton,
1989), their social ties to investors (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986), and their career experience
(Carroll & Mosakowski, 1987; Cooper, Woo, & Dunkleberg, 1989).
We argue that motivational differences also influence the entrepreneurial process.
For example, such things as variation across people in their perceptions of risk and
opportunity influence entrepreneurial decisions (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). People
vary in how they view the risk of expending resources before knowing the distribution of
outcomes (Palich & Bagby, 1995). Similarly, the probability of success at the
entrepreneurial process is low, and those people who are willing to proceed despite these
odds might be more optimistic or higher in self-efficacy than people deterred by these
odds. We consider the incorporation of this individual-level variation in motivation to be
important to the entrepreneurial process.
To isolate the effects of entrepreneurial motivation, other factors that could have a
causal effect on the process and outcome of entrepreneurship need to be controlled. One
category of control variables is the external environment. These would include such things
as (1) political factors (e.g., legal restrictions, quality of law enforcement, political stability,
and currency stability); (2) market forces (e.g., structure of the industry, technology
regime, potential barriers to entry, market size, and population demographics); and (3)
resources (e.g., availability of investment capital, labor market including skill availability,
transportation infrastructure, and complementary technology). Most researchers either
explicitly or implicitly agree that these categories of factors influence the entrepreneurial
process and need to be controlled to measure the effect of motivations on the
entrepreneurial process. 3

While it is clear why the above factors need to be controlled if we are to fully
understand how motivation is related to entrepreneurship, it is less clear how
opportunities affect this relationship. Because the first two authors were unable to agree
on the concept of opportunities, we present two versions of the relationship between
opportunities and motivation. First, we will present the view shared by Shane and Collins,
then we will present Locke’s view.
Entrepreneurs, opportunities, and the effects of motivation: Shane and Collins’
version

Opportunities are aspects of the environment that represent potentialities for profit
making. We follow Shane and Venkataraman (2000, p. 220) to define entrepreneurial
opportunities as ‘‘situations in which new goods, services, raw materials, and organizing
methods can be introduced and sold at greater than the cost of their production.’’ Since
potentialities are not yet actual, measuring them objectively and prospectively at the level
of an individual entrepreneur poses daunting challenges.
Entrepreneurs can pursue opportunities in any industry at any time. For example,
some entrepreneurs build successful new companies by contributing to the founding of a
new industry, such as Robert Swanson in biotechnology. Other entrepreneurs build new
companies in old and mature industries such as Sam Walton in retailing.
Aggregate statistics show us that the general category of opportunities to which Sam
Walton and Bob Swanson responded was not equal. The average value of new businesses
created in retail is lower than the average value of new businesses created in
biotechnology. Because human motivations are likely widely distributed across industry
categories at the aggregate level, statistically significant differences in the mean value of
businesses created in different industry categories suggest that the value of opportunities
varies across industry. This does not mean that entrepreneurs cannot successfully pursue
opportunities in low-opportunity industries. Rather it means that the opportunities in
these industries are simply less attractive to the average person.
The value of opportunities also varies within industries. Because the opportunities
that entrepreneurs identify and pursue have different economic value, the opportunities
themselves influence entrepreneurial behavior. We believe that it is important for
behaviorally oriented entrepreneurship researchers to consider and measure the economic
value of these opportunities in research about the motivations of entrepreneurs.
For example, in the early 1970s, Butler Lampson and Chuck Thacker, researchers at
Xerox Parc, invented the Alto—the first personal computer (PC). However, their design
would have cost over US$10,000 to build. When Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak came up
with the design for the Apple computer, their design cost less than US$3000 to build.
Because the number of people who would pay more than US$10,000 for a PC was much
smaller than number of people who would pay US$3000, the financial value of the Jobs and
Wozniak opportunity was greater than the value of the Xerox opportunity. One would
expect that differences in the estimates of the value of the PC opportunity that resulted
from the different solutions influenced the decisions of the different parties about their
opportunities. Of course, although it is possible that Jobs and Wozniak possessed more of
the relevant motives to pursue entrepreneurial opportunities than did Lampson and

Thacker, researchers can only estimate the effect of these motives if they account for the
differences in the two opportunities.
Although we argue that opportunities influence entrepreneurial behavior, we do not
argue that opportunities fully determine the process. Entrepreneurs are people and may
make different decisions when confronted with similar opportunities. In addition to being
influenced by the opportunity that Steve Jobs pursued at the time of founding, the
development of Apple was likely influenced by Steve Jobs’ motivations.
Empirically, the objective and subjective parts of opportunity are difficult to
separate. The mechanism for actualizing an opportunity often initially exists mainly in the
entrepreneur’s mind, making the entrepreneur’s idea for how to exploit the opportunity a
personal interpretation of the opportunity. This idea is basically what we would call vision.
Such judgments may be mistaken; entrepreneurs sometimes believe that they have
identified valuable opportunities when, in fact, no valuable opportunities actually existed,
at least in the form in which they were conceptualized (e.g., Federal Express’s abortive
attempt at Zap Mail).
Also, entrepreneurs may differ in how they interpret opportunities. For example,
the development of the Internet has allowed entrepreneurs to develop new organizing
methods, such as ‘‘e-tailing,’’ that were never before possible. Although a wide variety of
entrepreneurs have responded to the opportunities to develop new organizing methods
that the Internet has generated, these entrepreneurs have developed approaches of
different value in response to this organizing opportunity. Some entrepreneurs have
developed opportunities to compete with established retailers through e-tailing, while
others have sought only to design web sites. Even though the way that opportunities are
manifested in the entrepreneur’s plans for exploitation are personal, the variance in their
estimated value likely influences the decisions that people make in the entrepreneurial
process and can confound attempts to measure the effects of motivation on this process.
This is true even if the value is partially a function of the other decisions that the
entrepreneur has made and partially a function of external forces.
Entrepreneurs, opportunities’, and the effects of motivation: Locke’s version

Opportunities are aspects of the environment viewed from a certain perspective. We
view opportunities as potentialities for profit making. Since potentialities are not yet
actual, we would argue that they could not be measured except in the negative sense, that
is, in terms of metaphysical limitations or upper limits. For example, there is virtually no
potential market for Mercedes cars in countries where the median annual income is
US$1000. Similarly, the potential profit is higher for a general retailer than a comb
manufacturer due to a difference in the scope of the business. Furthermore, one can
calculate the average profitability of previous entrants into an already existing market (e.g.,
house building). But one cannot quantify what an entrepreneur might do that has never
been done before.
For example, consider discount retailing. When Wal-Mart entered the discount retail
business, the size and dollar value of the existing retail market were known. So this could
be considered an ‘‘opportunity.’’ But what could not have been known was how much of
that market Wal-Mart could actually capture (e.g., 0.01%, 5%, 30%, 50%, 75%) and how
much they could grow the whole market subsequently by attracting buyers who would not

ordinarily shop for discounts. This would depend, at least in part, on Sam Walton.
Thousands of other retailers with the same ‘‘opportunity’’ as Wal-Mart went nowhere or
remained small players. Other big players fell on hard times (Sears, K-Mart). At the same
time, new competitors sprang up (Target, Costco), which could have been a threat to WalMart. Certainly, Sam Walton took advantage of an opportunity but, in part, he created the
opportunity himself through his own entrepreneurial actions.
Consider an even more complex example: the PC market. Before Apple Computer,
there was not much of a PC market outside of a few schools and businesses and a few
thousand hobbyists using primitive computers. So what was the ‘‘opportunity?’’ There was
mainly a potential market—people who might buy a more sophisticated PC if offered. The
success of the PC would depend on Steve Jobs’ approach, including the quality of the design
features, the software, the price, and Apple’s ability to market the product. Again, in a
certain sense, Jobs created the mass market. There was no way of knowing in advance what
the size of the market would be because Jobs was asking people to buy something that did
not exist before. Nor could it be known if Apple would dominate the market that they
created or, due to strategic errors, they would lose most of it to rivals—as they did.
The most obvious means of controlling for environment and opportunity—insofar
as they can be controlled for—are (1) to use a sample of entrepreneurs within the same
industry and country (or region); 4 and (2) to measure aspects of the environment that
might vary within industry and region (for an example of both, see Baum et al., 2001).
While these controls would eliminate much of the problem, they do not eliminate it
completely. This is because realizing an actuality out of potentiality depends not on any
mechanical laws of finance but on free will—the capacity of the human mind to discover,
through creative thought, solutions that had not existed before. This is what I have
elsewhere called vision (Locke, 2000b).
Motivation and entrepreneurship: important motivational concepts from prior
quantitative research

Previous research has explored several motivations and their effects on
entrepreneurship. In this section, we discuss several of these concepts. However, we do not
provide a complete review of prior empirical research for two reasons. First, the definitions
of entrepreneurship used in previous empirical research on motivation and
entrepreneurship are inconsistent with our definition, making it impossible to draw direct
implications of prior work for research using our definition. 5 Second, prior research has
suffered from significant methodological problems that we discuss below, making prior
findings suggestive rather than conclusive, even for research that employs the same
definition of entrepreneurship as was used in those studies. Therefore, we discuss previous
empirical research only to illustrate the ways in which motivation can influence different
aspects of the entrepreneurial process.
Need for achievement

Within the research domain of personality traits and entrepreneurship, the concept
of need for achievement (nAch) has received much attention. McClelland (1961) argued
that individuals who are high in nAch are more likely than those who are low in nAch to

engage in activities or tasks that have a high degree of individual responsibility for
outcomes, require individual skill and effort, have a moderate degree of risk, and include
clear feedback on performance. Futher, McClelland argued that entrepreneurial roles are
characterized as having a greater degree of these task attributes than other careers; thus, it
is likely that people high in nAch will be more likely to pursue entrepreneurial jobs than
other types of roles.
Johnson (1990) conducted a traditional review of 23 studies, which varied
regarding samples, measurement of nAch, and definitions of entrepreneurship. Based on
this group of studies, Johnson concluded that there is a relationship between nAch and
entrepreneurial activity—in this case, nAch distinguished firm founders from other
members of society. In a similar review of 19 studies, Fineman (1977) concluded that both
projective and questionnaire measures of nAch significantly predict firm founding.
Collins, Locke, and Hanges (2000) conducted the first and only meta-analysis of
nAch and entrepreneurship studies, examining 63 nAch and entrepreneurship studies. The
overall finding of the meta-analysis is that nAch is significantly related to founding a
company. The nAch both differentiated between entrepreneurs and others (mean r =.21)
and predicted the performance of the founders’ firms (mean r =.28). Further, they found no
significant differences in the predictive validity of three different measures of nAch (TAT,
questionnaires, and the Miner Sentence Completion Scale).
Moreover, Collins et al. (2000) found that the relationship between nAch and
entrepreneurial activity was moderated by several factors. First, nAch was a more robust
predictor of group-level effects (e.g., mean differences between firm founders and another
profession, mean differences between high-performing and low-performing founders) than
individuallevel effects (e.g., predicting the performance of individuals). Second, they found
that while nAch is a strong differentiator between firm founders and nonmanagerial
employees (mean r =.39), it is not a strong differentiator between firm founders and
managers (mean r =.14).
Based on these results, Collins et al. (2000) concluded that nAch is an effective tool
for differentiating between firm founders and the general population but less so for
differentiating between firm founders and managers. Further, they concluded that nAch
might be particularly effective at differentiating between successful and unsuccessful
groups of firm founders. Thus, nAch could play a very useful role in explaining
entrepreneurial activity.
Risk taking

Risk-taking propensity is another motivation of interest, which emerged from
McClelland’s (1961) original research on entrepreneurs. McClelland claimed that
individuals with high achievement needs would have moderate propensities to take risk.
This claim by McClelland is especially interesting for entrepreneurship research because
the entrepreneurial process involves acting in the face of uncertainty. Liles (1974) argued
that entrepreneurs often must accept uncertainty with respect to financial well-being,
psychic well-being, career security, and family relations. Moreover, several theories of
entrepreneurship view the entrepreneur as bearing residual uncertainty (Venkataraman,
1997).

Atkinson (1957) argued that individuals who have higher achievement motivation
should prefer activities of intermediate risk because these types of activities will provide a
challenge, yet appear to be attainable. On the other hand, individuals who score high on the
motive to avoid failure will avoid intermediate risks. Instead, they will prefer easy and safe
under-takings (because there is a high chance of success) or extremely difficult and risky
ones (because it will be easy to explain failure without accepting personal blame).
Following the lead of Atkinson, risk-taking propensity has been defined in the
entrepreneurship literature as the willingness to take moderate risks (Begley, 1995).
Despite these theoretical claims, previous research suggests that firm owners do not
differ significantly from managers or even the general population in risk taking (Low &
Macmillan, 1988). For example, Litzinger (1961) failed to find any difference between
motel owners and motel managers on risk preference. Kogan and Wallach (1964) found
that firm founders clustered around the mean risk-taking score of the general population.
In comparisons of firm founders and managers, neither Babb and Babb (1992) nor Palich
and Bagby (1995) found significant differences between the two groups in terms of risktaking propensity. However, none of the above studies identified if firm founders were low,
moderate, or high risk-takers. Only Brockhaus (1980) tested for the actual level of risk
taking, and he found that firm founders did prefer moderate risk but did not differ from
managers in this regard.
Only one study found a difference between firm founders and managers in this
motivation. In a study of 239 New England business executives, Begley (1995) found that
risk-taking propensity was the only trait on which founders and nonfounders differed. As
with the studies described above, Begley failed to identify whether the level of
entrepreneurial risk taking was low, moderate, or high.
While these empirical findings suggest that risk taking may or may not be an
entrepreneurial motivation, self-efficacy may be confounding the findings. Several recent
evaluative studies using interviews and expert evaluations (e.g., Corman, Perles, & Vancini,
1998; Fry, 1993) showed that firm founders objectively have a higher propensity for risk
than do members of the general population, but that firm founders do not perceive their
actions as risky. Similarly, Sarasvathy, Simon, and Lave (1998) found that when expert firm
founders were asked to evaluate the same entrepreneurial simulations as bankers, the firm
founders saw opportunities in information that the bankers thought indicated risk. Thus,
the measurement of risk-taking propensity may be confounded with high self-efficacy.
Tolerance for ambiguity

Schere (1982) argued that tolerance for ambiguity is an important trait for
entrepreneurs because the challenges and potential for success associated with business
start-ups are by nature unpredictable. Budner (1982) defined tolerance for ambiguity as
the propensity to view situations without clear outcomes as attractive rather than
threatening. Because entrepreneurs continually face more uncertainty in their everyday
environment than do managers of established organizations, entrepreneurs who remain in
their jobs are likely to score high on tests for this trait than would managers.
There is mixed support for this prediction. Begley and Boyd (1987) found that firm
founders scored significantly higher in tolerance for ambiguity than did managers, defined
as non-founders working in business. In smaller sample studies, both Schere (1982) and

Miller and Drodge (1986) found that firm founders were significantly higher in tolerance
for ambiguity than were managers. Finally, based on a review of four additional studies,
Sexton and Bowman (1986) identified tolerance for ambiguity as a distinguishing
psychological characteristic between firm founders and managers.
However, several studies did not match these findings. Babb and Babb (1992) found
no significant difference in tolerance for ambiguity between founders and non-founders of
rural businesses in Northern Florida. Similarly, Begley (1995) found no significant
differences between New England firm founders and managers on their tolerance for
ambiguity. This inconsistency in findings and potential methodological problems in the
research that provides support for the tolerance of ambiguity proposition suggests that we
do not yet know if tolerance of ambiguity is a motivation that affects any part of the
entrepreneurial process.
Locus of control

Another motivational trait that has received attention is locus of control—the belief
in the extent to which individuals believe that their actions or personal characteristics
affect outcomes. Individuals who have an external locus of control believe that the outcome
of an extent is out of their control, whereas individuals with an internal locus of control
believe that their personal actions directly affect the outcome of an event (Rotter, 1966). As
McClelland (1961) discussed earlier, individuals who are high in nAch prefer situations in
which they feel that they have direct control over outcomes or in which they feel that they
can directly see how their effort affects outcomes of a given event. This point was extended
by Rotter (1966) who argued that individuals with an internal locus of control would be
likely to seek entrepreneurial roles because they desire positions in which their actions
have a direct impact on results.
The research on locus of control suggests that firm founders differ from the general
population in terms of locus of control. Shapero (1977) found that firm founders from
Texas and Italy were more ‘‘internal’’ than other groups of professions reported by Rotter
(1966). This same pattern holds with female firm founders versus the general female
population (Bowen & Hisrich, 1986) and with Black firm founders versus the general Black
population (Durand, 1975).
While locus of control orientation differs between firm founders and the general
public, most studies have not found a difference between firm founders and managers on
locus of control, a result similar to the situation with studies on nAch. For example, Babb
and Babb (1992) found no differences in locus of control between founders and managers
in small businesses in Northern Florida. Similarly, Brockhaus (1982) found that managers
and owners of new businesses did not differ on locus of control. In a longitudinal study of
students, Hull, Bosley, and Udell (1980) found that locus of control did not differentiate
between students who went on to work in managerial positions and those who started
their own business. Finally, in the studies of New England entrepreneurs, Begley (1995)
and Begley and Boyd (1987) found that locus of control did not distinguish between
founders and managers. We suspect that one reason for the difference between firm
founder and the general population, but not between founders and managers, is the
similarity between founding a company and managing. Defining entrepreneurial situations
as starting a company rather than working for others might not capture the real differences

between entrepreneurial and non-entrepreneurial situations. For example, serving as a
manager in a rapidly growing high-technology company might demand greater
entrepreneurial motivations than starting a corner grocery store.
Self-efficacy

Self-efficacy is the belief in one’s ability to muster and implement the necessary
personal resources, skills, and competencies to attain a certain level of achievement on a
given task (Bandura, 1997). In other words, self-efficacy can be seen as task-specific selfconfidence. Self-efficacy for a specific task has been shown to be a robust predictor of an
individual’s performance in that task and helps to explain why people of equal ability can
perform differently. An individual with high self-efficacy for a given task will exert more
effort for a greater length of time, persist through setbacks, set and accept higher goals, and
develop better plans and strategies for the task. A person with high self-efficacy will also
take negative feedback in a more positive manner and use that feedback to improve their
performance. These attributes of self-efficacy may be important to the entrepreneurial
process because these situations are often ambiguous ones in which effort, persistence, and
planning are important.
One study directly assessed the effect of self-efficacy on some dimension of the
entrepreneurial process. Baum (1994) assessed firm founders in the architectural
woodworking industry on a number of variables including general traits and motives (e.g.,
tenacity and positive affectivity), specific skills and competencies (e.g., industry experience
and technical skills), situation-specific motivation (e.g., goal setting and self-efficacy),
vision, and strategic action (e.g., quality and service emphasis). In a LISREL model, Baum
found that self-efficacy (measured as the self-efficacy to grow the company) had a strong
positive relationship with realized growth. In fact, it was the single best predictor in the
entire array of variables.
Goal setting

Tracy, Locke, and Renard (1998) conducted a study of the owners of small printing
firms. Both concurrent and longitudinal measures of four aspects of performance were
obtained: financial performance, growth, and innovation. The quantitative goals the
entrepreneurs had for each outcome were significantly related to their corresponding
outcomes, both concurrently and longitudinally (nAch in this study was unrelated to
performance). Baum, Locke, and Smith (2001) also found that growth goals were
significantly related to the subsequent growth of architectural woodworking firms.
Although there have been other studies of entrepreneurial goals, to our knowledge, only
these two have related quantitative measures of goal difficulty to performance.

Motivation and entrepreneurship: important m o t i v a t i o n a l concepts from
prior qualitative research
The section below is based largely on qualitative observations, including an
inductive study based on secondary sources of 70 wealth creators by Locke (2000b).

Independence
Independence entails taking the responsibility to use one’s own judgment as
opposed to blindly following the assertions of others. It also involves taking responsibility
for one’s own life rather than living off the efforts of others.
Many investigators have observed that the entrepreneurial role necessitates
independence. First, the entrepreneur takes responsibility for pursuing an opportunity
did not exist before. Second, entrepreneurs are, in the end, responsible for results,
whether achieved or not achieved. Further, individuals may pursue entrepreneurial
careers because they desire independence. For example, in interviews with U.S. female
firm founders, Hisrich (1985) found that one of the prime motivations for starting a
business was a desire for independence.
In addition, there is some existing empirical evidence which suggests that
entrepreneurs may be higher in independence than other individuals. Hornaday and Aboud
(1973) surveyed 60 founders with several personality inventories and showed that these
founders were significantly higher than the general population on measures of
independence. Similarly, in a study with 63 founders, Aldridge (1997) found that firm
founders scored significantly higher than the general population on personality measures
of independence.
Drive

There is some relation between the term drive and that of nAch, but we use the
term drive somewhat more broadly. We use it basically to refer to the willingness to put
forth effort— both the effort of thinking and the effort involved in bringing one’s ideas
into reality. When entrepreneurs pursue opportunity, they must take action to make it
real.
We differentiate the four aspects of drive: ambition, goals, energy and stamina,
and persistence. Ambition influences the degree to which entrepreneurs seek to create
something great, important, and significant when they pursue opportunities. The
nature of the entrepreneurial ambition may include making money or the desire to
create something new, from conception to actuality.
Ambition translates into setting high goals for oneself and others (see the earlier
Goal setting section). It is well known that high goals lead to better performance
results than moderate or low goals (Locke & Latham, 1990). To achieve high goals
requires enormous energy and stamina. When goal-directed energy is sustained over time,
it is called persistence or tenacity. Pursuing an opportunity is never easy; failure at some
point or in some respect is an inevitable part of the process.
What sustains such effort over long periods? One factor is high self-efficacy or
task-specific confidence—a topic that we covered earlier. The second factor is, strangely
enough, love.
Egoistic passion

More precisely, it is a passionate, selfish love of the work. Some commentators
like to pretend that businessmen’s core motive is to selflessly serve their employees and

society. We argue, in contrast, that ego is a central motive. The true or rational egoist
passionately loves the work; they love the process of building an organization and making it
profitable. They are motivated to do what is actually in their own interest—that is, to do
everything necessary.
Surprisingly, there have been virtually no quantitative studies of the role of
passion in entrepreneurship. One exception is the study by Baum et al. (2001). Although
not shown in that report, when Baum entered passion for the work as a separate variable
along with 29 other variables from five domains (personality, situational motivation,
skills, strategy, and environment), passion had a direct significant effect on firm growth.
Problems with previous research on human motivation and entrepreneurship
and suggested solutions to these problems

Despite the importance of including individual-level factors in a comprehensive
explanation for the entrepreneurial process, previous studies of entrepreneurial motivation
have often led to disappointing results (Busenitz & Barney, 1997). However, we believe that
researchers should not conclude from this failure that human motivation is irrelevant to
the entrepreneurial process. Rather, we suggest that there are specific reasons for the
limited results obtained in previous research.
Controls for opportunities

Previous research has suffered from a lack of control for the variation in the
opportunities that different entrepreneurs pursue (Gartner, 1985). To accurately
measure the effects of motivation on entrepreneurial decisions, researchers need to
control the effects of opportunities (Shane, 2000, 2001). As Venkataraman (1997)
argued, a valuable opportunity for an individual is one that generates a level of profit
that exceeds the entrepreneur’s opportunity cost, a premium for the illiquidity of
money, time, and effort expended, and a premium for bearing risk and uncertainty.
Because some opportunities will exceed this threshold by a greater amount than will
others, the nature of the opportunity will influence entrepreneurial decisions.
Researchers need to know the magnitude of the force exerted by the opportunities
themselves to accurately estimate the effect of the individual motivations on
entrepreneurial decisions. In the absence of such controls, one cannot know if the
effects observed represent the effects of individual motivations or are artifacts of
unobserved correlation between the opportunities and the people who pursue them
(Shane, 2000, 2001). Prior research has generally failed to control the effect of
opportunities by examining entrepreneurs pursuing different opportunities without
explicitly modeling the value of the different opportunities pursued.
In addition, prior studies have generally compared managers (who may or may not
have identified entrepreneurial opportunities) with firm founders (who have). However,
human motivations can influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial
activities only if those activities are possible. If people have not discovered
entrepreneurial opportunities or have discovered opportunities but cannot act on
those discoveries, it is impossible to determine if their individual motivations make them
more or less likely than others to act on entrepreneurial opportunities. Therefore, one

cannot tell from studies that compare managers to firm founders whether certain
motivations influence people to make entrepreneurial decisions unless researchers have
ensured that the managers have discovered opportunities and have measured the value
of those opportunities. Otherwise, researchers might only capture the fact that some
managers have all of the right motivations, but no opportunities in which to use them.
We offer four suggestions to researchers interested in examining the effect of
motivations on entrepreneurial decisions about how to deal with variation in
opportunities. First, researchers could explore settings in which potential entrepreneurs
pursue reasonably identical opportunities. For example, every year, many potential
entrepreneurs evaluate and pursue opportunities to purchase McDonald’s franchises.
When a person applies to be a McDonald’s franchisee or company-owned outlet manager,
one applies only to be part of the system rather than to select a particular outlet.
Therefore, the opportunities to which people respond in this setting are identical. By
comparing the motivations of a sample of people seek to be McDonald’s franchisees with
people who seek to be McDonald’s company-owned outlet managers, researchers can
determine the contributions of particular motivations on the decision to entrepreneur (see
Tracy et al., 1998).
Second, as a variety of researchers are beginning to do, scholars could employ
experimental designs in which potential entrepreneurs are asked to make a series of
entrepreneurial decisions in a controlled simulation. By measuring the motivations of
potential entrepreneurs and examining the correlation between the motivations and the
decisions made in these simulations, researchers could determine how motivations
influence entrepreneurial decisions.
Third, the most obvious means of controlling opportunity are to use a sample
of entrepreneurs within the same industry and country (or region), and to measure
aspects of the environment that might vary within industry and region (for an example
of both, see Baum et al., 2001). We recommend these approaches to limiting other
sources of variance than motivations from studies of motivation and entrepreneurship.
Fourth, as some researchers are beginning to do, scholars could employ third
parties to code the value of potential opportunities. For example, researchers could
explore the propensity of inventors to found companies based on their inventions.
Because all inventors are at risk of exploiting their inventions through firm formation,
this setting provides a useful context in which to explore the decision to entrepreneur.
By partialing out the externally evaluated value of the opportunities, researchers could
determine whether motivations influence the decision to entrepreneur, net of the
effects of the value of the opportunity.
Entrepreneurship as a process

Much of the prior research has looked at entrepreneurship as a profession that
certain types of people adopt, rather than as a process that occurs over time. This
approach is problematic because the appropriate conceptual lens through which to look
at entrepreneurship is as a dynamic process. Because entrepreneurship is episodic and
much entrepreneurial action is not long lasting (e.g., raising venture capital is a one-time
activity for many entrepreneurs), it is unrealistic to model motivation as dividing
entrepreneurs and other members of society into two groups.

In fact, relatively little of the motivation research on entrepreneurship has
considered the effects of motivation on specific steps in the entrepreneurial process. Most
studies on motivation and entrepreneurship adopt static designs that seek to determine if
firm founders are different from each other, managers, or the general population at the
moment the two groups are measured. This approach makes two problematic
assumptions. First, it assumes that a given motivation influences all steps in the
entrepreneurial process equally, and that the effects of a given motivation do not select out
some people at earlier stages in the process. Second, it assumes that, at the moment in
which the founders are compared to the others, the founders who are still in charge of the
organizations that they founded represent the population of people who engage in
entrepreneurial activity.
Because entrepreneurship is a process, with tremendous selection at each step, we
believe that these assumptions are quite faulty. The motivations that allow progression
from opportunity recognition to resource assembly might not lead from financial assembly
to first sales. For example, to assemble resources, a person might need to be highly
confident. Those people lacking sufficient overconfidence to assemble resources are selected
out of the entrepreneurial process. If there is very little variation in overconfidence among
the people who have resources and seek to reach first sales, overconfidence will have no
effect on achieving first sales.
For these reasons, we believe that it may not be possible to examine the direct
effects of a lead entrepreneur’s motivations on the financial performance of a new
company that the individual founds. The effects of motivation might be captured by the
intervening variables in any causal model of the effects of motivation on firm performance.
For example, those higher in nAch might be more likely to obtain venture capital
financing. However, once venture capital financing is measured, there is no effect of nAch
on firm performance.
We offer several specific suggestions for how researchers could better think about
how motivations influence the entrepreneurial process. First, researchers could
incorporate motivations into a dynamic evolutionary perspective on entrepreneurship by
using motivations to distinguish those individuals who select out at different steps in the
entrepreneurial process. For example, motivations could separate those individuals who
positively evaluate opportunities from those who do not, those who obtain outside
funding from those who do not, those who continue to pursue opportunities from those
who abandon the effort, or those who pursue rapid rather than slow growth.
The pursuit of opportunity provides a good example. As Aldrich and Zimmer (1986,
p. 14) explain, ‘‘opportunities are irrelevant unless taken advantage of, and people vary
widely in their ability to seize opportunities’’ (italics added). We agree, but would argue that
people also differ widely in their motivation to seize opportunities. It would be
interesting to know if certain motivations predispose people to take action in response
to the discovery of opportunities. One might argue, for example, that people higher in
self-efficacy will be more likely to seek financing to exploit opportunities than will people
lower in self-efficacy. Because the process of financing exposes a person’s entrepreneurial
ideas to the scrutiny of skeptical others, those people willing to expose their ideas to
scrutiny might have to be more confident than those who will not.
Second, researchers could theorize more deeply about how motivation might
impact entrepreneurial decisions. Rather than falling back on the stock idea that firm

founders must be fundamentally different types of people from other members of society,
we suggest researchers consider how motivations might influence some people to make
different decisions from others in the entrepreneurial process. For example, inventors
higher in self- efficacy might found firms to exploit their inventions while inventors lower
in self-efficacy might license their technology to others. Similarly, entrepreneurs with a
greater need for independence might self-finance new firms, whereas those with a lesser
need for independence might seek venture capital.
We also suggest that it is not necessarily important for entrepreneurship
researchers to show that specific motivations influence the financial performance of new
firms. If financial performance of a new firm is conditional on the ability of an
entrepreneur to create the firm, and that act of creation depends heavily on human
motivation, then human motivation matters to entrepreneurship even if motivation has no
direct effect on the performance of the newly founded firm. In fact, we would expect that
the more significant a firm that an entrepreneur founds, the less their motivations
influence the firm formation process. For example, the more significant the new firm that
an entrepreneur builds, the less influence they will have personally on day-to-day
operations, and the less that we would expect the financial performance of the firm to be
affected by their personal motivations.
Meta-analysis

The third criticism of previous research is the failure to use meta-analysis. The
ability to combine the results of scores or hundreds of individual studies into a single
statistic was not always available to researchers. This sometimes led people who
conducted narrative reviews to underestimate the effect of the variable being
considered; for example, non-significant results in single studies may be due to sampling
error rather than invalidity. Although meta- analytic results are not available for all the
motivations we discuss, such data, where available, throw new light on some motivations
(however, we caution researchers that the other important conditions we describe, such as
controlling for the nature of opportunities and minimizing variation in the types of
entrepreneurs, would need to be present in these studies before meta-analysis would
provide a valuable technique).
Wrong motives

A fourth criticism of extant research is its tendency to study the wrong motives.
Some motives are more relevant to entrepreneurial activity than others. For example,
risk-taking propensity as measured by self-perception and tolerance for ambiguity has long
been assumed to be an entrepreneurial motive, but the evidence so far is only equivocal.
Regarding risk, perhaps the problem has been that people cannot perceive the riskiness of
their own actions, or that what is risky to one person is not risky to another. For example,
several recent studies using interviews and expert evaluations (e.g., Corman et al., 1988;
Fry, 1993) showed that entrepreneurs objectively have a higher propensity for risk than
either entrepreneurs or the general population but that entrepreneurs do not perceive their
actions as risky. Thus, the effects of risk-taking propensity may be confounded with the high
self-efficacy of entrepreneurs.

We suggest that researchers better define the motives that they think are
important and focus on more precise measures of them. One way to do that would be for
researchers to go back to the underlying psychological literature and examine how
researchers have dealt with the nuances of theorizing about and measuring the same
motives in other settings. If psychologists have figured a way around the problems of
using self-perceptions in the measurement of risky behavior, like drug usage, those same
techniques can be brought to bear on the measurement of risky behavior in
entrepreneurial settings.
We believe that another important step for research on motivation and
entrepreneurship would be for researchers to develop more complete models of the
entrepreneurial process before examining the effects of particular motives on particular
activities. A fuller under- standing of the role of motivations in the overall process
would require consideration of factors other than motives. We suggest that researchers
develop explanations that include the variety of such influences.
Indirect effects

A fifth criticism has been the failure to look for indirect effects of motivational traits.
Most, though not all, researchers have assumed that traits and motives have direct
effects on outcomes and this may be true to some extent. However, an increasing body of
literature is revealing that traits affect action indirectly through other mechanisms. For
example, in the general realm of work, conscientiousness is a reliable predictor of
performance, but there is considerable evidence that the effects of conscientiousness on
work performance are mediated by situation-specific factors such as goal setting and goal
commitment (Locke, in press). Similarly, Bandura (1997) has argued that locus of
control is not a strong, direct predictor of performance in a task; and studies have
shown that the effects of self-efficacy mediate the effects of locus of control when selfefficacy is added to the equation (Bandura, 1997). Therefore, locus of control effects
reported in the entrepreneurship literature might be proxying unobserved self-efficacy.
One recent study to have taken the approach of considering indirect effects of
motivation in the setting of entrepreneurial action is that of Baum et al. (2001), who studied
the growth of small companies in the architectural woodworking industry. They included
variables from five separate domains: traits and motives (which comprised passion for
the work, tenacity, and drive), skills and abilities, situation-specific motivation (e.g.,
goals, self-efficacy), business strategies, and environmental factors. They combined the
measures within each domain into single indexes and related these indexes to each other
and to venture growth. All the domains played a role in venture growth but the effects
of motives were all indirect. Motives worked through skills, situation-specific motivation,
and strategies to affect growth. Given the indirect effects observed in this study, we
suggest that researchers consider such indirect patterns in their explanations for the
effect of motivation on entrepreneurial action.

Definitions
A sixth criticism has stemmed from a lack of consistent definitions of
entrepreneurship. In general, the definition of what constitutes entrepreneurial activity
varies significantly across studies. For example, McClelland (1965) viewed managerial
positions of certain types such as sales as one that demanded entrepreneurial skills,
whereas much of the recent work in the applied field of management has sought to
compare entrepreneurs to managers. Therefore, it is unclear if the samples from these
different studies are comparable, or even represent entrepreneurship in a meaningful
way. This point, of course, brings us back to the importance of a common definition of
entrepreneurship. As we indicated earlier, we advocate the definition proposed by
Shane and Venkataraman (2000). Whether researchers adopt this particular definition,
however, is less important than the existence of a common definition. Without a common
definition, it will not be possible to accumulate findings that are comparable from study
to study.
How motivations influence entrepreneurship

In this section, we suggest how human motivations might influence the
entrepreneurial process. We offer this example to help future researchers design empirical
tests of the role of motivation in entrepreneurship. Our example is shown graphically in
Fig. 1.
We begin with the set of human motivations that psychologists have shown to
influence many aspects of human behavior. These include the motivations that we
described earlier in the study, in particular, nAch, locus of control, desire for independence,
passion, and drive. We propose that entrepreneurship is a process that begins with the
recognition of an entrepreneurial opportunity and is followed by the development of an
idea for how to pursue that opportunity, the evaluation of the feasibility of the opportunity,
the development of the product or service that will be provided to customers, assembly of
human and financial resources, organizational design, and the pursuit of customers.
We suggest that some or all of the motivations influence the transition of individuals
from one stage of the entrepreneurial process to another. In some cases, all of the
motivations might matter. In other cases, only some of the motivations might matter. The
relative magnitudes of how much each motivation matters will likely vary, depending on
the part of the process under investigation. In fact, it is quite plausible that motivations that
influence one part of the process have all of their effects at that stage in the process and
have no effects on later stages in the process.
In this example, motivations are not the only things that influence these transitions.
Cognitive factors, including knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs), certainly matter. All
action is the result of the combination or integration of motivation and cognition (Locke,
2000a). First, the entrepreneurs need to have some knowledge, especially of the industry
and of any relevant technology that is critical to success. They can hire people with certain
specialized skills that they lack, but they must possess enough expertise to know that they
are doing the right thing. Second, the entrepreneur must have skills. The necessary skills
will depend on the circumstances, but they may include such factors as selling and
bargaining, leadership, planning, decision making, problem solving, team building,

communication, and conflict management. Third, the entrepreneur needs to have the
requisite abilities, including intelligence. Possessing the necessary KSAs enables the
entrepreneurs to develop a viable vision, including a strategy for the organization and to
carry it out successfully. Motivation helps the entrepreneur to acquire such KSAs in the first
place and provide the impetus and energy to implement the needed actions. The human
capital literature in entrepreneurship (e.g., Bates, 1990; Schoonhoven, Eisenhardt, &
Lyman, 1990) has begun to show the effect of certain types of knowledge and skills on the
start-up and resource assembly parts of this process.

The opportunities themselves certainly matter. Prior research has shown that such
things as the possession of a patented technology make individuals more likely to engage
in the entrepreneurial process (Shane, 2001). One would expect that identification of a large
market or a high margin product would do the same.
Furthermore, environmental conditions matter. First, opportunities may interact in
interesting ways with the attributes of people. Second, as much of the macro-level
research has shown, the willingness to engage in entrepreneurial activities depends on
such things as the legal system of the country in which the entrepreneur operates, the age
of the industry, the availability of capital in the economy (and to the industry in
particular), the condition of capital markets, and the state of the overall economy. We
believe that these factors are important, but that it might also be interesting to know
whether motivations of particular people lead to different types of entrepreneurial
action under different environmental conditions.
Motivations might be more or less stronger than these other factors in the degree
that they influence particular transition points. In addition, there might be important and
interesting interaction effects between motivations and opportunities, KSAs, and

environmental factors. The relative importance of different categories of factors, their
independent and combined effects, and their relative importance at different stages of
the entrepreneurial process are clearly important theoretical and empirical questions that
remain largely unexplored. We hope that researchers will begin to explore them because
they appear to us to be central issues in the field of entrepreneurship.
Conclusions

Recent research on entrepreneurship has focused largely on macro-level
environmental forces (Aldrich, 2000) and the characteristics of entrepreneurial
opportunities (Christiansen, 1997). Although this focus has greatly enhanced our
understanding of entrepreneurial activity, it ignores the role of human agency.
Entrepreneurial activity depends on the decisions that people make, suggesting that the
attributes of the decision makers should influence the entrepreneurial process. Although
researchers have rightly criticized much of the existing empirical research on the role of
human motivation in entrepreneurship (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986; Carroll & Mosakowski,
1987), we believe that the development of entrepreneurship theory requires consideration
of the motivations of people making entrepreneurial decisions.
To provide a road map for this process, we have reviewed the major motivations
that prior researchers have suggested should influence the entrepreneurial process, as well
as suggested some motivations that are less commonly studied in this area. In addition to
outlining the major reasons for exploring these motivations, we have identified the major
weaknesses that have limited the predictive power of previous research on this topic. We
have pointed out the problems that prior research has faced. Results have been limited, we
believe, because prior research has failed to adequately control for entrepreneurial
opportunities, has adopted a static perspective on entrepreneurship, focused on the wrong
motives, has adopted inadequate and inconsistent definitions of entrepreneurship, has
failed to look for indirect effects, and has failed to meta-analyze data across studies. We
have offered explicit solutions for future research to adopt to overcome these problems. By
providing specific recommendations for how to overcome each of these problems and by
offering an example of how motivations might influence the entrepreneurial process at
each of its stages, and in concert with cognitions, opportunities, and environmental forces,
we hope to advance the rigor and useful results from research on motivation and
entrepreneurship. After all, if even sociologists who have argued strongly and repeatedly
against the usefulness of trait-based research in entrepreneurship acknowledge that
motivated entrepreneurs are important to the entrepreneurial process, then the inclusion
of human motivation in our theories of the entrepreneurial process is crucial.

References
Aldrich, H. (2000). Organizations evolving. Beverly Hills: Sage.

Aldrich, H., & Zimmer, C. (1986). Entrepreneurship through social networks. In D. Sexton, &
R. Smilor (Eds.), The art and science of entrepreneurship ( pp. 3–23). Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger.

Aldridge Jr., J. H. (1997). An occupational personality profile of the male entrepreneur as
assessed by the 16PF fifth edition. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia.

Amit, R., Meuller, E., & Cockburn, I. (1995). Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 95–106.

Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motives in fantasy, action, and society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
Babb, E. M., & Babb, S. V. (1992). Psychological traits of rural entrepreneurs. Journal of
Socio-Economics, 21, 353–362.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: the exercise of self control. New York: Freeman.

Bates, T. (1990). Entrepreneur human capital inputs and small business longevity. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 72(4), 551–559.
Baum, R. (1994). The Relation of Traits, Competencies, Vision, Motivation, and Strategy to
Venture Growth. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD.
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. (2001). A multi-dimensional model of venture
growth. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2), 292–303.

Baumol, W. (1968). Entrepreneurship in economic theory. American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 64–71.

Begley, T. M. (1995). Using founder status, age of firm, and company growth rate as the
basis for distinguishing entrepreneurs form managers of smaller businesses. Journal of
Business Venturing, 10, 249–263.

Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. P. (1987). A comparison of entrepreneurs and managers of small
business firms. Journal of Management, 13, 99–108.
Bowen, D. D., & Hisrich, R. D. (1986). The female entrepreneur: a career development
perspective. Academy of Management Review, 11, 393–407.

Brockhaus, R. H. (1980). Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management
Journal, 23, 509–520.

Brockhaus, R. H. (1982). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In C. A. Kent, D. L. Sexton, & K.
H. Vesper (Eds.), Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship ( pp. 39–57). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Budner, S. (1982). Intolerance of ambiguity as a personality variable. Journal of Personality,
30, 29–50.
Busenitz, L., & Barney, J. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large
organizations: biases and heuristics in strategic decision making. Journal of Business
Venturing, 12, 9–30.

Carroll, G., & Mosakowski, E. (1987). The career dynamics of self-employment.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 32, 570–589.

Christiansen, C. (1997). The innovators dilemma. Cambridge: Harvard Business School
Press.

Collins, C., Locke, E., & Hanges, P. (2000). The relationship of need for achievement to
entrepreneurial behavior: a meta-analysis. Working paper, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD.

Cooper, A., Woo, C., & Dunkleberg, W. (1989). Entrepreneurship and the initial size of firms.
Journal of Business Venturing, 3, 97–108.

Corman, J., Perles, B., & Vancini, P. (1988). Motivational factors influencing high-technology
entrepreneurship. Journal of Small Business Management, 26, 36–42.

Durand, D. E. (1975). Effects of achievement motivation and skill training on the
entrepreneurial behavior of black businessmen. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 14, 76–90.

Evans, D., & Leighton, L. (1989). Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American
Economic Review, 79, 519–535.

Fineman, S. (1977). The achievement motive construct and its measurement: where are we
now? British Journal of Psychology, 68, 1–22.
Fry, F. L. (1993). Entrepreneurship: a planning approach. Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN: West
Publishing.
Gartner, W. (1985). A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new
venture creation. Academy of Management Review, 10(4), 696–706.

Hisrich, R. D. (1985). The woman entrepreneur in the United States and Puerto Rico: a
comparative study. Leadership and Organizational Development Journal, 5, 3–8.

Hornaday, J. A., & Aboud, J. (1973). Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. Personnel
Psychology, 24, 141–153.

Hull, D. L., Bosley, J. J., Udell, G. G. (1980). Renewing the hunt for heffalump: identifying
potential entrepreneurs by personality characteristics. Journal of Small Business, 18, 11–18.
Johnson, B. (1990). Toward a multidimensional model of entrepreneurship: the case of
achievement motivation and the entrepreneur. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
14(3), 39–54.

Kirzner, I. (1973). Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago, IL, US: University of Chicago
Press.
Kirzner, I. (1997). Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process: an
Austrian approach. The Journal of Economic Literature, 35, 60–85.

Kogan, N., & Wallach, M. A. (1964). Risk taking. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Liles, P. R. (1974). New business ventures and the entrepreneur. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Litzinger,W. (1961). The motel entrepreneur and the motel manager. Academy of
Management Journal, 8, 268–281.

Locke, E. A. (2000a). Motivation, cognition and action: an analysis of studies of task goals
and knowledge. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 49, 408–429.
Locke, E. A. (2000b). The prime movers: traits of the great wealth creators. New York:
AMACOM.

Locke, E. A. (in press). Self-set goals and self-efficacy as mediators of incentives and
personality. In M. Erez, U. Kleinbeck, & H. Thierry (Eds.), Work motivation in the context of a
globalizing economy. London: Erlbaum.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting and performance. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Low, M., & MacMillan, I. (1988). Entrepreneurship: past research and future challenges.
Journal of Management, 14, 139–161.

McClelland, D. C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.

McClelland, D. C. (1965). Toward a theory of motive acquisition. American Psychologist, 20,
321–333.
Miller, D., & Drodge, C. (1986). Psychological and traditional determinants of structure.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 31, 539–560.

Palich, L. E., & Bagby, D. R. (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial risktaking: challenging conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 425–438.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of
reinforcement. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 80, 609.

Sarasvathy, D., Simon, H., & Lave, L. (1998). Perceiving and managing business risks:
differences between entrepreneurs and bankers. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 33, 207–225.

Schere, J. (1982). Tolerance of ambiguity as a discriminating variable between
entrepreneurs and managers. Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings, 42, 404–
408.

Schoonhoven, C., Eisenhardt, K., & Lyman, K. (1990). Speeding products to market: waiting
time to first product introduction in new firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 177–
207.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934). The theory of economic development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Sexton, D.L., & Bowman, N.B. (1986). Validation of a personality index: comparative
psychological characteristics analysis of female entrepreneurs, managers,
entrepreneurship students, and business students. Frontiers of entrepreneurship research
(pp. 513–528). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities.
Organization Science, 11(4), 448–469.

Shane, S. (2001). Technology opportunities and new firm creation. Management Science,
47(9), 1173–1181.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of
research. Academy of Management Review, 25(1), 217–226.

Shapero, A. (1977). The displaced, uncomfortable entrepreneur. Psychology Today, 9, 83–
88.

Tracy, K., Locke, E., & Renard, M. (1998). Conscious goal setting versus subconscious
motives: longitudinal and concurrent effects on the performance of entrepreneurial firms.
Paper presented at the meeting of the Academy of Management, Boston, MA.

Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: an editor’s
perspective. In J. Katz, & R. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, firm emergence,
and growth, vol. 3 (pp. 119–138). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Zahra, S., & Dess, G. (2001). Entrepreneurship as a field of research: encouraging dialogue
and debate. Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 8–11
1

By this definition, we do not imply that the study of firm formation is unimportant. We believe that firm-founding
entrepreneurship is an interesting and important special case of entrepreneurial activity and one that is in need of greater
study.
2 Interested readers might note that this definition is consistent with several classical definitions of entrepreneurship,
including those of Kirzner (1973) and McClelland (1961) who argue that people other than business owners or founders
can be entrepreneurs.
3 We do not deny that there may be interactions between environmental and motivational variables, nor do we deny that
entrepreneurs may take actions that modify the environment. However, we suggest that it is important for researchers to
understand the main effects of these variables before they explore more complex interaction effects.
4 Readers should note that this approach is effective in measuring the exploitation of an entrepreneurial opportunity but
not the discovery of opportunity. Entrepreneurs do not need to be in an industry to discover an opportunity in it.
However, to exploit an opportunity in a given industry, they must, by definition, be in that industry.
5 When discussing prior empirical research, we have identified the definition of entrepreneurship used wherever
possible.

