Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 2007, Vol.13, No. 4

The Role of Cognitive Style and Risk Preference
on Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy and
Entrepreneurial Intentions
Saulo Dubard Barbosa
Université Pierre Mendès France
Megan W. Gerhardt & Jill Richard Kickul
Miami University
The purpose of the current study is to address
the distinctive roles of cognitive style and risk
preference on four types of entrepreneurial selfefficacy and entrepreneurial intentions. More
specifically, we examine how both cognitive
style and risk preference separately and
interactively contribute to an individual’s
assessment of his/her own skills and abilities as
well as to his/her own entrepreneurial
intentions.
This study investigated these
relationships using an international sample of
528 entrepreneurial students across three
universities. Results indicated that individuals
with a high risk preference had higher levels of
entrepreneurial intentions and opportunityidentification efficacy, whereas individuals with
a low risk preference had higher levels of
relationship efficacy, and tolerance efficacy.
Individuals with an intuitive cognitive style were
also found to have lower perceived self-efficacy
concerning the establishment of relationship
with investors, the economic management of the
new venture, and their capacity to tolerate
ambiguity. However, intuitive individuals who
had a high preference for risk exhibited higher
levels of opportunity identification efficacy.
Finally, contrary to our final hypothesis,
analytic individuals with a low preference for
risk had higher levels of relationship and
tolerance self-efficacy than intuitive individuals
with a high risk preference. Implications of
these findings and directions for future research
are discussed.
The question of what separates those who
choose to pursue entrepreneurial pursuits from
those who opt not to be entrepreneurs is an

intriguing issue, and investigating the role of
individual differences in entrepreneurial
behavior and intentions is a growing field of
research. While increased understanding of the
individual-level constructs that may contribute
to successful entrepreneurial endeavors appears
to be an essential endeavor, prior research has
only begun to scratch the surface of this pursuit
(Markman, Balkin, & Baron, 2002; Zhao,
Seibert, & Hills, 2005). The purpose of the
current study is to examine in-depth the role of
two
key
individual
differences
and
entrepreneurial motivation and behavior. More
specifically, we examine how cognitive style
and risk preference—both separately and
interactively—contribute to an individual’s
entrepreneurial efficacy as well as to his/her own
entrepreneurial intentions.
The current study examines the specific
ways in which cognitive style and risk
preference may affect entrepreneurial selfefficacy beliefs and entrepreneurial intentions.
Drawing upon different conceptual frameworks
from the literature on psychology and
entrepreneurship,
we
formulate
specific
hypotheses concerning the relationships among
these constructs.
We then present the
methodology used to test such hypotheses and
the results we found. Since self-efficacy is a
task-specific construct, we opted to test the
effects of cognitive style and risk preference on
four task-specific types of efficacy that have
been found to relate to overall entrepreneurial
efficacy. Finally, we discuss our findings in the
light of existent conceptualizations of
entrepreneurial risk and cognition.

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference

Theoretical Background
The Unique Role of Cognitive Style
Researchers have postulated that a focus on
the role of cognition has the potential to make a
significant contribution to the study of
entrepreneurship (Allinson, Chell, & Hayes,
2000; Baron, 1998; Mitchell et al., 2002). As
defined
by
Mitchell
et
al.
(2002),
“entrepreneurial cognitions are the knowledge
structures that people use to make assessments,
judgments, or decisions involving opportunity
evaluation, venture creation, and growth” (p.
97). Cognition research offers us multiple
mechanisms, both theory-driven and empirically
robust, to build a deeper, richer understanding of
how we learn to see opportunities and further
assess our skills and abilities along the
entrepreneurial intentions process.
An
individual’s cognitive style may influence
his/her preferences for different types of
learning, knowledge gathering, information
processing, and decision making—many of the
critical behaviors and actions an entrepreneur is
confronted with on a daily basis. As individuals
process information, they develop a sense of
how capable they are to engage in a course of
action (self-efficacy) and how likely it is that
they will engage in the action (intention).
To date, a number of researchers have
presented potential conceptualizations and
dimensions of cognition and cognitive style
(e.g., Kahneman, 2003; Nickerson, Perkins, &
Smith, 1985; Ornstein, 1977).
Early on,
Ornstein (1977) referred to two modes of
awareness that reflect the rational and intuitive
sides of an individual. This super-ordinate
dimension of cognitive style is identified as
intuition-analysis (Allison et al, 2000). Drawing
upon the work of a number of theorists and
empirical researchers who have argued that the
dimensions of cognitive style can be ordered
within a unitary framework, Allinson & Hayes
(1996) reported the development and validation
of a new instrument, the Cognitive Style Index
(CSI).
Based on research with the CSI,
Allinson, Chell, and Hayes (2000) found that
people showing entrepreneurial behavior tend to
score high on the intuition pole of the intuitionanalysis dimension. Such finding is consistent
with the description of a specific type of
entrepreneur—the ‘expert idea generator’—

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 87
which has been characterized as predominantly
intuitive (Miner, 1997).
Additionally, an
individual’s cognitive style may influence their
preference for different types of learning,
knowledge gathering, information processing,
and decision making, many of the critical
intentions and actions an entrepreneur is
confronted with on a daily basis.
Moreover, the assertion that entrepreneurs
generally present an intuitive cognitive style is
also supported by research on entrepreneurial
cognition. In particular, this line of research has
suggested that cognitive heuristics and biases
may explain the risky ideas entrepreneurs pursue
(L. Busenitz & Barney, 1997; L. W. Busenitz,
1999; Palich & Bagby, 1995). Heuristics and
biases, indeed, are typical of our intuitive
system, i.e., they could be described as cognitive
tools of human intuition (Kahneman, 2003;
Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). The
assertion that entrepreneurs make more use of
cognitive heuristics—such as overconfidence,
representativeness, law of small numbers, etc.—
than nonentrepreneurs, implies therefore that
entrepreneurs
are
more intuitive than
nonentrepreneurs.
The explanation usually
given (or simply assumed) in the literature on
entrepreneurial cognition is that the use of
cognitive heuristics enables fast decision making
and reduces risk perception, which in turn would
explain the risky ideas entrepreneurs pursue (L.
Busenitz & Barney, 1997; L. W. Busenitz, 1999;
Keh, Foo, & Lim, 2002; Palich & Bagby, 1995;
Simon, Houghton, & Aquino, 2000). In this
sense, intuitive thinking seems to create a bias
toward action that favors the decision of starting
a venture. If this is true, we can hypothesize that
intuitive thinking will be associated with higher
levels of entrepreneurial intentionality.
H1: Individuals having an intuitive
cognitive style will exhibit higher levels of
entrepreneurial intentions than individuals
having an analytical cognitive style.
Impact of Cognitive Style on
Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy
Another important factor that may impact
intentionality and risk taking is an individual’s
belief in his/her own capacity of executing the
behavior, i.e., his/her perceived self-efficacy (I.
Ajzen, 2002; N. Krueger, 1993; N. Krueger &

88 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies
Dickson, 1994). Self-efficacy is defined as “an
individual’s belief in one’s capability to
organize and execute the courses of action
required to produce given attainments”
(Bandura, 1977, p. 3).
The self-efficacy
construct is derived from social cognitive theory,
which states that human functioning is a result
of the interplay between personal, behavioral,
and environmental influences (Bandura, 1986).
Social cognitive theory argues for the
importance of human agency, viewing an
individual as being influential in his or her own
development. In keeping with this view, an
individual is able to exercise control over his or
her own thoughts, feelings, and actions, and this
control is heavily influenced by an individual’s
view of self. Meta-analytic investigations have
found self-efficacy to consistently and positively
relate to performance across a variety of workrelated contexts (Stajkovic & Luthans, 1998). In
the field of entrepreneurship, self-efficacy has
theoretically proposed to lead to entrepreneurial
intentions and behavior (Boyd & Vozikis, 1994),
and has been empirically found to relate
positively to entrepreneurial intentions (Chen,
Greene, & Crick, 1998).
Given the importance of self-efficacy, the
examination of what individual level factors
may impact efficacy perceptions continues to be
an important task. To date, research has found
self-efficacy perceptions to relate to a wide
variety of individual differences, including
conscientiousness, extraversion, openness to
experience, and emotional stability (Judge &
Ilies, 2002), as well as learning goal orientation,
need for achievement, and locus of control
(Phillips & Gully, 1997), among others. The
examination of individual differences that
impact entrepreneurial self-efficacy has received
more limited attention. More recently, Zhao,
Seibert, and Hills (2005) found entrepreneurial
experience and risk propensity to positively
relate to entrepreneurial self-efficacy.
Our
current study aims to build upon this past
research and contribute to the understanding of
the antecedents that lead to entrepreneurial selfefficacy perceptions.
Self-efficacy as first conceptualized by
Bandura (1986) is a task-specific construct,
meaning it is best assessed with regard to
specific tasks and behaviors. However, since
“entrepreneurial self-efficacy” is more of a

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul
broad conceptualization, we predicted it would
be composed of several task-specific types of
self-efficacy (see research of DeNoble et al.,
1999 and Chen et al., 1998 for review of facets
of entrepreneurial self-efficacy). It is these taskspecific types of efficacy that may be
differentially related to cognitive style. Based
on understanding and insight into the
entrepreneurial process, we identified four
potential types of task-specific self-efficacy that
would fall under the broader umbrella of
“entrepreneurial efficacy” that are drawn upon
the work of DeNoble et al. (1999) and Chen et
al. (1998):
• Opportunity-Identification Self-Efficacy:
the individual’s perceived self-efficacy
concerning his/her capacities to identify
and develop new product and market
opportunities.
• Relationship
Self-Efficacy:
the
individual’s perceived self-efficacy
concerning his/her capacities to build
relationships, especially with potential
investors and people who are connected
to capital sources.
• Managerial
Self-Efficacy:
the
individual’s perceived self-efficacy
concerning
his/her
managerial
capacities, especially economic and
financial management.
• Tolerance Self-Efficacy: the individual’s
perceived
self-efficacy
concerning
his/her capacities to work productively
under conditions of stress, pressure,
conflict, and change.
Olson (1995) introduced the notion that
different approaches to information processing
are more effective at different phases of the
entrepreneurial life cycle. For example, when an
entrepreneur is immersed in opportunity
identification (e.g., attempting to develop a new
product, service, or technology application),
his/her thinking tends to be predominantly
intuitive (Olson, 1995). Similarly, in later stages
of the process as the entrepreneur shifts to
evaluation of market opportunities, and the
planning and implementation of the new
venture, his/her information processing is
predominantly rational and analytic (Cole, Field,
& Harris, 2004; Olson, 1995).
Since the
different dimensions of self-efficacy may
become more salient or relevant to different

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference
phases of the entrepreneurial process (Kickul,
Gundry, & Whitcanack, 2005), we hypothesize
the following:
H2a: Individuals
having an intuitive
cognitive style will score higher in the types of
self-efficacy that refer to the early stage of the
entrepreneurial
process
(opportunityidentification efficacy) than those with an
analytical cognitive style.
H2b: Individuals having an intuitive
cognitive style will score lower in the
dimensions of perceived entrepreneurial selfefficacy that refer to the latter stages of the
entrepreneurial process (relationship selfefficacy, managerial self-efficacy and tolerance
self-efficacy) than those with an analytical
cognitive style.
The Distinct Role of Risk Preference
In addition to cognitive style, another
possibly related but separate factor at the
individual level is one’s own preference for risk.
Risk preferences consist of a general tendency,
or the general desire, to pursue or avoid risks
(Sitkin & Pablo, 1992). They are viewed as a
determinant of risk propensity, which is defined
as an individual’s general tendency toward
either taking or avoiding risk within a particular
kind of decision context (Mullins & Forlani,
2005; Sitkin & Pablo, 1992).
This means that when faced with different
situations, an individual will likely show
differing risk propensities; even if his/her risk
preferences do not change a great deal. At the
same time, different individuals faced with the
same situation may present different risk
propensities/preferences. Thus, an individual’s
risk preferences correspond to his “risk
disposition”, which, if combined with contextual
factors, is likely a good predictor of what his/her
attitudes toward risk will be for a specific kind
of context.
Throughout this text the terms risk
preference and risk propensity are used almost
interchangeably to designate an individual’s
general tendency toward either taking or
avoiding risk. While risk preference more
specifically describes the measure we used
(from the PSED) risk propensity is the term used
more frequently in the literature (although there

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 89
is no consensus about how to measure this
construct)i.
In Sitkin and Pablo’s (1992) conceptual
model, for example, risk propensity has a
preponderant role in influencing risk perception
and risk behavior. The same assumption is
shared by economic models in which risk
seeking individuals become entrepreneurs and
risk averse individuals become employees (e.g.,
Kihlstrom & Laffont, 1979).
Thus, in order to test those assumptions and
fully examine the role of risk preferences on the
pathway to entrepreneurship, we hypothesize:
H3: Individuals having a high preference
for risk will exhibit higher levels of
entrepreneurial intentions than individuals
having a low preference for risk.
On the other hand, the relationship between
risk preference and self-efficacy has been
explored in the literature on entrepreneurship on
a very limited basis. For instance, Krueger and
Dickson (1994) showed that an increase in
perceived self-efficacy leads to an increase in
risk taking, by affecting perceptions of
opportunities and threats. Similarly, Sitkin and
Pablo (1992) suggested that risk-averse decision
makers are more likely to attend to and weigh
negative outcomes, overestimating threats and
underestimating opportunities, whereas riskseeking decision makers tend to attend to and
weigh positive outcomes, overestimating
opportunities and underestimating threats. Most
recently, Zhao et al (2005) examined the
relationship of risk propensity to entrepreneurial
self-efficacy, finding a positive relationship. In
this sense, it is unclear if risk preferences affect
perceptions of self-efficacy, or if instead
perceptions of self-efficacy affect risk
preferences. Thus, without presuming causality,
but in order to simply investigate the
relationship between risk preference and selfefficacy, we state the following:
H4: Individuals having a high preference
for risk will exhibit higher levels of all four types
of entrepreneurial self-efficacy (opportunityidentification self-efficacy, relationship selfefficacy, managerial self-efficacy, and tolerance
self-efficacy) than individuals having a low
preference for risk.

90 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies

The Dual – Interactive Role of Cognition
and Risk Preferences on Self-Efficacy
and Intentionality
As stated by MacCrimmon and Wehrung
(1985), “Risk-taking has two components: the
riskiness of situations and the willingness of
people to take risks” (p.1). By combining
cognitive style and risk preferences, our attempt
is to take into account these two components of
risk-taking behavior.
Stated simply, cognition is the reason why
situations look more or less risky. Hogarth
(1987) has clarified this point: “from a logical
viewpoint, it is absurd to make a statement of
the kind that one situation or venture is more
uncertain than another; it is simply you who are
more uncertain about one of the situations”
(Hogarth, 1987, p. 13). Indeed, the author
argues that it is our limited informationprocessing capacities that are the source of
uncertainty. Analyzing cognitive style gives us
a clue of how individuals process (transform,
reduce, elaborate, store, recover and use) the
sensory input they receive from the environment
(situational factors). On the other hand, risk
preferences are by definition “the willingness of
people to take risks.”
Together, cognitive style and risk
preferences may influence the self-efficacy and
the intentions of nascent and potential
entrepreneurs in ways that have not yet been
explored.
Drawing once again upon the
theoretical framework underlying self-efficacy
beliefs, social-cognitive theory states that the
primary source of self-efficacy beliefs is the
process of enactive mastery (Bandura,
1986;1997). It is almost definitional to state, for
example, that analytics tend to develop different
skills through mastery experiences when
compared to intuitives – enhancing therefore
different types of self-efficacy. One could also
hypothesize that different risk preferences are
associated with different types of self-efficacy,
because risk preferences may have influenced an
individual’s past choices and then his/her
previous mastery experience, affecting the
individual’s beliefs about what he/she is or is not
capable of.
At this point, it may be useful to think
about the different combinations of risk
preference and cognitive style. For instance,

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul
from the hypotheses early stated we can infer
that intuitive individuals with high preference
for risk will present the highest levels of
entrepreneurial intentions and the strongest
beliefs concerning their capacity of identifying
and exploiting opportunities. Inversely, we can
imagine that analytic individuals with low
preference for risk will exhibit the lowest levels
of entrepreneurial intentions and will not feel so
confident in their capacity to recognize
opportunities. In order to fully test those
hypotheses, we state:
H5: Intuitive individuals having a high
preference for risk will exhibit higher levels of
entrepreneurial intentions than
analytic
individuals having a low preference for risk.
Since different task-specific types of selfefficacy relate to different stages of the venture
process (Kickul, Gundry, & Whitcanack, 2005),
it seems useful to investigate more in detail the
dual role of cognitive style and risk preference
on the different task-specific types of selfefficacy. As indicated earlier, previous research
has shown that analytics and intuitives have
different aptitudes that are required in different
phases of the venture process. In particular, it
has been pointed out that intuition is more
relevant to the activities executed in the earlier
phases of the process (i.e., opportunity
identification), whereas analysis is preponderant
in the tasks executed in the later stages of
implementation and management of the new
venture (N. F. Krueger & Kickul, 2006; Olson,
1995). Based on this literature, we hypothesize:
H6a: Intuitive individuals having a high
preference for risk will exhibit higher levels of
opportunity identification efficacy than analytic
individuals having a low preference for risk.
H6b: Analytic individuals having a high
preference for risk will exhibit higher levels of
relationship efficacy, managerial self-efficacy
and tolerance self-efficacy than intuitive
individuals having a low preference for risk.

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference

METHODOLOGY
Participants
Participants were 528 university students
enrolled in entrepreneurship programs across
three countries (Russian, Norway and Finland).
In Russia, 324 questionnaires were gathered
from students of the Baltic State Technical
University in St. Petersburg. From them, 226
third-year students were enrolled in the bachelor
Business Administration program with the
International Industry Management Department
(IIMD), 20 students were enrolled in the Master
of Business Administration program and 76
students were taking the second Master of
Business degree on the same IIMD (these are
typically students from the engineering
Departments of the University, pursuing an
additional degree in Economy).
Our
questionnaire was administrated in December
2004. After controlling for missing values,
seven questionnaires were removed due to a
high percentage of missing values. Totally, 317
questionnaires obtained from Russian students
were entered into the analysis. The average
student age was 21.5 years, with 54% females.
Twenty-three percent reported to have parents
who had been self-employed, while only 7% had
been self-employed personally.
Forty six
percent of the respondents had never been
employed earlier, and about the same proportion
had between one and three years of work
experience.
In Norway, the data for this study was
gathered from 111 third year Business
administration bachelor students within Bode
Graduate School of Business.
It was
administered as a hand-out in a lesson in a
method course for third-year business bachelor
students. The average student age was 28 years,
with 45% being female. Forty percent reported
to have parents who had been self-employed,
and 17% had been self-employed personally.
The
Finnish
students
were
100
undergraduates enrolled in the three year
Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA)
program at the Helsinki School of Economics Mikkeli Campus.
The questionnaires were
administrated to students enrolled in a
Management course given by one of the coauthors. The average student age was 22 years,
with 43% being female. Fifty one percent

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 91
reported to have parents who had been selfemployed, and only 10% had been selfemployed personally. Forty six percent of
respondents have never been employed earlier,
and about the same proportion had between one
and five years of work employment experience.
From this brief description it is evident that
while in all three cases the main group of
respondents are third-year bachelor business
students, a number of differences were noticed.
Norwegian students were older than both
Finnish and Russian students, and that may
explain the higher percent of those who have
tried self-employment. A higher proportion of
the Norwegian and the Finnish students had selfemployed parents than in the Russian sample.
This may be due to the fact that entrepreneurial
activities in Russia were allowed only 15 years
ago. Finally, slightly more women are found
among Russian students than among the samples
from the other two countries.
Participants completed measures of selfefficacy, entrepreneurial intentions, cognitive
style, as well as risk preferences. Prior to the
main data collection, questionnaire was
translated to Russian and Norwegian and tested
on a smaller number of respondents. Finnish
students received an English version of
questionnaire.
All Finnish students who
participated in the project were taking a
management course in English. Hence, it was
assumed they could answer an English version.
It was a challenge to find the correct Russian
and Norwegian translation and to take into
consideration all cultural and language nuances.
(For example, in some cases the same
expression translated from English to Russian
had a slightly different meaning than the same
expression translated from English to
Norwegian).
In order to overcome these
difficulties the authors had a number of
telephone conferences. The questionnaires were
pretested on colleagues and students in order to
discuss the wording and the meaning of the
questions.

Measures
Entrepreneurial Intentions
Entrepreneurial intentions were measured
by 9 items adopted from Krueger, Reilly, &
Carsrud (2000) concerning intentions to start a

92 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies
business. Responses were given along a 7-point
scale from 1=very unlikely to 7=very likely,
except for the first item, which ranged from
1=would prefer to be employed by someone to
7=would prefer to be self-employed. Another
sample item read: “I plan to start and run my
own business in the near future.” The final scale
yielded a Cronbach’s alpha of .92 and was
unidimensional.
Cognitive Style
Participants completed the Cognitive Style
Index (CSI) (Allinson & Hayes, 1996), a 38item measure that has a true-false response mode
(true coded as ‘1” and false coded as ‘0’). The
index identifies an individual's cognitive style as
being either analyst or intuitive (dichotomized
measurement). Allinson & Hayes (1996) found
discriminant validity for their instrument and
later work on the CSI by Allinson, Chell, and
Hayes (2000) found that people showing
entrepreneurial behavior tend to be intuitive as
opposed to analytic on the CSI measure.
Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy
A total of 18 items were included in the
entrepreneurial self-efficacy scales: developing
new product and market opportunities
(DeNoble, Jung, & Ehrlich, 1999), economic
management (Anna, Chandler, Jansen, & Mero,
2000), initiating investor relationships, and
tolerance for ambiguity (DeNoble, Jung, &
Ehrlich, 1999). One self-constructed item was
added to the DeNoble et al. (1999) investor
relationship scale. The overall Cronbach alpha
reliability of the self-efficacy was .93. A factor
analysis was conducted using the Principal Axis
Factoring method with oblique rotation
(oblimin): a total of four factors emerged,
confirming the four types of task-specific selfefficacy we expected. Since all items presented
loadings above .5, they were all retained, and
factor scores were used in the subsequent
analysis. As previously discussed, the four taskspecific types of Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy
were named and interpreted as follows:
• Opportunity-Identification
SelfEfficacy: the individual’s perceived
self-efficacy
concerning
his/her
capacities to identify and develop new
product and market opportunities.

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul
•

•

•

Relationship
Self-Efficacy:
the
individual’s perceived self-efficacy
concerning his/her capacities to build
relationships, especially with potential
investors and people who are connected
to capital sources.
Managerial
Self-Efficacy:
the
individual’s perceived self-efficacy
concerning
his/her
managerial
capacities, especially economic and
financial management.
Tolerance
Self-Efficacy:
the
individual’s perceived self-efficacy
concerning his/her capacities to work
productively under conditions of stress,
pressure, conflict, and change.

Risk Preference
Past research has used a great variety of
risk measures (e.g., MacCrimmon & Wehrung,
1985) in order to assess risk preference and risk
propensity, without making a clear distinction
between them. In our research, risk preference
was assessed using the same measure found in
The Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics
(PSED) (Reynolds, 2000) survey. To represent
this preference the PSED provides a categorical
measure of the risk-return preference.
Specifically, the PSED measure asks:
“Assuming you are the sole owner, which
situation would you prefer? 1) A business that
would provide a good living, but with little risk
of failure, and little likelihood of making you a
millionaire, or 2) A business that was much
more likely to make you a millionaire but had a
much higher chance of going bankrupt”, which
were coded “0” and “1” respectively for the two
types of new businesses with different
risk/return (alpha = low risk, “0”; beta = high
risk, “1”).
Within our own sample,
approximately 72% were risk-averse (chose the
alpha category).

Results
In order to analyze all of our different
hypotheses, we conducted a series of tests that
ranged from simple t-tests (for the main effects)
to multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA)
that considered the interactive effects of
cognitive style and risk preference on the four
types of self-efficacy and entrepreneurial

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 93

intentions. For each of the hypotheses, we
mention the tests and findings based on that type
and level of analyses below.
To examine our first hypothesis, we
conducted a t-test to determine whether
individuals having an intuitive cognitive style
would have higher levels of entrepreneurial
intentions than individuals having a more
analytic cognitive style. We did not find support
for hypothesis 1 (t = -.94, p = ns). In fact,
analytics had a slightly higher score on
intentionality (mean = 4.05, SD 1.21) than
intuitives (mean = 3.95, SD = 1.24).
In investigating both hypotheses 2a and 2b
using MANOVA (dependent variables were all
four dimensions of self-efficacy), we found

partial support for intuitive cognitive style on
several of our dimensions. More specifically,
while hypothesis 2a was not supported (no
significant differences between intuitives and
analytics on opportunity identification; F = 1.32,
p = ns), we did find full support of hypothesis 2b
in that intuitives scored lower in the dimensions
of perceived entrepreneurial self-efficacy that
refer to the latter stages of the entrepreneurial
process (i.e., relationship self-efficacy, F = 6.92,
p<.05; managerial self-efficacy, F = 5.39, p<.05;
and tolerance self-efficacy, F = 8.03, p<.05) than
those with an analytical cognitive style. Table 1
reveals all of the means for each of the
dimensions by type of cognitive style.

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics (Cognitive Style)
Self-Efficacy (SE)
SE Opportunity
SE Relationships
SE Management
SE Tolerance Ambiguity

Cognitive
style
Intuitives
Analytics
Intuitives
Analytics
Intuitives
Analytics
Intuitives
Analytics

Hypothesis 3 was also supported in that
results from our t-tests revealed that individuals
having a high preference for risk exhibited
higher levels of entrepreneurial intentions than
individuals having a low preference for risk (t =
5.04, p<.05; high risk mean = 4.45 (SD = 1.16);
low risk mean = 3.85 (SD = 1.20)).
As for hypothesis 4, we found partial
support. As shown in Table 2 and in our
MANOVA analyses, individuals having a high
preference for risk exhibited higher levels of
entrepreneurial self-efficacy for opportunityidentification (F = 22.49, p<.05), relationship (F
= 18.69, p<.05), and tolerance (F= 27.44, p<.05)
than individuals having a low preference for
risk.
There were, however, no significant
differences between the two types of risk
preferences on our managerial self-efficacy
dimension (F = 2.49, p = ns).

Mean
.04
-.05
-.11
.11
-.09
.10
-.11
.12

Std.
Deviation
.97
.90
.92
.97
.93
.99
.93
.98

In examining the dual and interactive role
of cognitive style and risk preference on
intentionality and self-efficacy, we found mixed
support for hypotheses 5, 6a, and 6b. Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA) results revealed that
intuitive individuals having a high preference for
risk were found to have higher levels of
entrepreneurial intentions (mean = 4.56, SD
=.14) than analytic individuals having a low
preference for risk (mean = 3.98, SD = .08; F =
4.96, p<.05). To determine if these mean
differences were significant, we conducted
simple t-tests. This t-test revealed a discernable
difference between the above two means
(overall support for hypothesis 5). Figure 1
depicts the interaction and plotting of the means
for entrepreneurial intentions by cognitive style
and risk preference.

94 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics (Risk Preference)
Self-Efficacy (SE)
SE Opportunity

RP: Alpha or
Beta
beta
alpha

Mean
.32
-.11

Std.
Deviation
0.99
0.89

SE Relationships

beta
alpha

-.30
.10

1.05
0.89

SE Management

beta
alpha

-.11
.04

1.02
0.95

SE Tolerance Ambiguity

beta
alpha

-.36
.13

0.92
0.94

Figure 1
Estimated Marginal Means of Summated Scale for Intentions
4.6

Estimated Marginal Means

4.4

4.2

4.0

Cognitive style

3.8
Intuitives

3.6

Analytics

beta

alpha

RP: Alpha or Beta

preference for risk (please see Table 3 for
means.
Finally, in investigating hypothesis 6a,
we found that intuitive individuals having a high
preference for risk exhibited higher levels of
opportunity identification efficacy (mean = .46,
SD = .93) than analytic individuals having a low
preference for risk (mean = -.09, SD = .85; F =

3.95, p<.05). Follow-up simple t-tests revealed
that these two means are indeed significant (t =
4.67, p<.05; see also Figure 2).
As for hypothesis 6b, analytic
individuals having a high preference for risk did
not exhibit higher levels of relationship efficacy,
managerial self-efficacy and tolerance selfefficacy than intuitive individuals having a low

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 95

Figure 2

Estimated Marginal Means of SE Opportunity
.5
.4

Estimated Marginal Means

.3
.2
.1

0.0

Cognitive style

-.1

Intuitives

-.2

Analytics

beta

alpha

RP: Alpha or Beta

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics (Cognitive Style & Risk Preference)
Self-Efficacy (SE)
SE Opportunity

SE Relationships

SE Management

Cognitive
style
Intuitives

RP: Alpha or
Beta
beta
alpha

Mean
.46
-.13

Std.
Deviation
0.93
0.93

Analytics

beta
alpha

.12
-.09

1.07
0.85

Intuitives

beta
alpha

-.51
.06

0.89
0.87

Analytics

beta
alpha

.01
.13

1.20
0.90

Intuitives

beta
alpha
beta
alpha

-.17
-.05
-.01
.14

0.98
0.91
1.07
0.97

Intuitives

beta
alpha

-.56
.08

0.75
0.93

Analytics

beta
alpha

-.07
.18

1.08
0.94

Analytics

SE Tolerance Ambiguity

96 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies

Although the interactions were significant
for relationship self-efficacy (F = 5.60, p<.05),
and tolerance self-efficacy (F = 3.94, p<.05), we
found unplanned effects that did not support
hypothesis 6b. More specifically, as shown in
Figures 3 and 4, analytic individuals with a low
preference for risk had higher levels of

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul

relationship and tolerance self-efficacy than
intuitive individuals with a high risk preference.
Follow-up simple t-tests revealed discernable
differences for relationship self-efficacy (t =
5.36, p<.05) and tolerance self-efficacy (t =
6.20, p<.05).

Figure 3

Estimated Marginal Means of SE Relationships
.2

Estimated Marginal Means

0.0

-.2

Cognitive style

-.4

Intuitives

-.6

Analytics

beta

alpha

RP: Alpha or Beta

Figure 4

Estimated Marginal Means of SE Tolerance Ambiguity
.4

.2

Estimated Marginal Means

0.0

-.2

-.4

Cognitive style

-.6

Intuitives

-.8

Analytics

beta

RP: Alpha or Beta

alpha

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference

Discussion
Summary of Findings
The results of this study suggest that
individuals with a high risk preference have
higher levels of entrepreneurial intentions and
opportunity-seeking
self-efficacy,
whereas
individuals with a low risk preference had higher
levels of relationship efficacy, and tolerance
efficacy. Our results also show that intuitives
tend to have lower perceived self-efficacy
concerning the establishment of relationship
with investors, the economic management of the
new venture, and their capacity to tolerate
ambiguity and stress. In addition, these findings
are consistent with the general assertion that
analytics and intuitives have different aptitudes
that are required in different phases of the
venture process (N. F. Krueger & Kickul, 2006;
Olson, 1995)—they differ at least in their
perceptions of their own aptitudes.
Our results were not supported when
examining the general assertion that individuals
having an intuitive cognitive style will exhibit
higher levels of entrepreneurial intentions than
individuals having an analytic cognitive style.
Instead, it seems that risk preference plays a
more preponderant role on entrepreneurial
intentions. This is particularly illustrated by
Figure 1, where (a) intuitives with high risk
preferences have significantly higher intentions
of starting their own business than analytics with
high risk preferences, and (b) intuitives with low
risk preferences have significantly lower
intentions of starting their own business than
analytics with low risk preferences. A possible
explanation in need of additional research is that
analytics tend to process more information
before making decisions or evaluations, and are
therefore less susceptible to their predispositions
toward risk than are intuitives.
Together, these findings support our
hypotheses concerning the dual and interactive
effect of risk preference and cognitive style on
intentionality.
We found that intuitive
individuals having a high preference for risk
exhibited higher levels of opportunity
identification efficacy. However, contrary to
our final hypothesis, analytic individuals with a
low preference for risk had higher levels of
relationship and tolerance self-efficacy than

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 97

intuitive individuals with a high risk preference.
Given the complexities of our results, we discuss
in further detail our findings concerning each
hypothesis in the following section.
Discussion of Findings for Each
Hypothesis
The mixed results we found across our six
general hypotheses necessitate a more detailed
discussion. In the following paragraphs, we
discuss the findings and implications for each
hypothesis, made in the light of the literature on
entrepreneurial risk and cognition. Finally, we
also discuss the limitations and practical
implications of our study.
First, our data did not support hypothesis 1,
i.e., that individuals having an intuitive cognitive
style will exhibit higher levels of entrepreneurial
intentions than individuals with an analytical
cognitive style. This suggests that cognitive
style alone is not a strong determinant of
entrepreneurial intentions. This hypothesis was
formulated based on the argument that
entrepreneurs seem to present stronger intuitive
thinking, characterized by an intensive use of
cognitive heuristics (L. Busenitz & Barney,
1997; L. W. Busenitz, 1999; Palich & Bagby,
1995), and score higher on the intuition pole of
the intuition-analysis continuum assessed by the
CSI (Allinson, Chell, & Hayes, 2000).
Therefore, our results for hypothesis 1 raise the
question whether intuition is an antecedent or a
consequence of entrepreneurial behavior.
Indeed, the failure to support hypothesis 1 (with
a student sample) suggests that actual
entrepreneurs may score higher on intuition
because they develop their intuitive thinking as a
consequence of their situation, which means that
they may more likely use cognitive heuristics
(when compared to nonentrepreneurs) out of
necessity. This, of course, is just one possible
interpretation of this finding, and this idea
should be explored in future research.
We also found mixed results for our
hypotheses concerning the relationship between
cognitive style and entrepreneurial self-efficacy.
In particular, we did not find support for
hypothesis 2a, whereas hypothesis 2b was
supported by our data. Without further research,
we can only speculate about the reasons for
these findings. However, one speculation is

98 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies
worth mentioning: our sample—composed
mainly by third year business students—may
have contributed to these results.1 This is
because students generally learn analytical tools
and develop analytical skills in management
courses. As a result, it is possible that the
business students in our sample felt more
confident with activities requiring a good deal of
analysis, especially those students with an
analytical cognitive style, which may explain the
corroboration of hypothesis 2b. On the other
hand, hypothesis 2a was not supported possibly
because analytic individuals may also feel
capable of identifying opportunities with
analytical tools, as opposed to intuition and gut
feeling. Once more, we cannot stress enough
the need for further research on entrepreneurial
cognition in educational contexts, which is the
only way to reduce speculations and clarify our
results.
We found support for hypothesis 3, i.e. that
individuals with a high preference for risk
exhibit stronger entrepreneurial intentions than
individuals with a low preference for risk.
Although this is consistent with previous
literature presenting the entrepreneur as a risktaker (e.g., Kihlstrom & Laffont, 1979), we did
not empirically test the idea that actual
entrepreneurs have indeed higher risk
preferences than nonentrepreneurs.
Indeed,
previous research has indicated that this is not
the case (Brockhaus, 1980; Palich & Bagby,
1995). With a sample of students, it appears that
risk preferences are indeed associated with
intentions to become an entrepreneur. However,
it is well known that the passage from intentions
to behavior depends on several factors—many
of them context-dependent—that were not
assessed in this study. In the following sections
we elaborate on the limitations of this study and
propose further avenues for research that
directly address these issues.
The results for hypothesis 4 suggest that
individuals with a high preference for risk have
stronger and positive perceptions of their
opportunity-identification
self-efficacy,
relationship self-efficacy, and tolerance selfefficacy. However, we found no significant
differences between the two types of risk
preference we assessed in terms of their
1

We thank one of the reviewers for raising this issue.

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul
perceived managerial self-efficacy. Here again,
one possible explanation for these mixed results
remains in our sample. Since third year business
students generally have taken several
management courses, they may feel fairly
confident in their capacity to manage a new
venture, regardless of their risk preference.
Along this line, further research could
investigate the extent to which the effect of
personal traits—such as risk preference—may
be influenced by education and training.
Our data supported hypothesis 5, indicating
that intuitive individuals having a high
preference for risk do exhibit higher levels of
entrepreneurial
intentions
than
analytic
individuals having a low preference for risk.
This supports the interaction between cognitive
style and risk preference, which is shown in
Figure 1. Based on these findings, it seems that
cognitive style may foster or inhibit the effects
of risk preference (a predisposition toward risk),
because, as shown in Figure 1, intuitive
individuals
present
higher
levels
of
entrepreneurial
intentions
than
analytic
individuals when both have high preferences for
risk (i.e., intuitives with high risk preference
exhibit higher intentions than analytics with high
risk preference), whereas intuitive individuals
present lower levels of entrepreneurial intentions
than analytic individuals when both have low
preferences for risk (i.e., intuitives with low risk
preference exhibit lower intentions than
analytics with low risk preference). A possible
explanation for this is that analytic individuals
may tend to process more information before
they make decisions, relying less on their
predispositions and more on the external
information
available
to them.
These
propositions should be investigated in future
research.
Finally, we found mixed results for
hypotheses 6a and 6b.
More specifically,
hypothesis 6a was supported, indicating that
intuitive individuals with a high preference for
risk do exhibit stronger beliefs of opportunity
identification efficacy than analytic individuals
with a low preference for risk. This offers
further evidence for the interaction between
cognitive style and risk preference. It is also
consistent with our previous findings: in
particular, it complements our findings
indicating that cognitive style alone is not a

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference
significant
determinant
of
opportunity
identification efficacy (Hypothesis 2a—not
supported) while risk preference is (Hypothesis
4—supported for opportunity identification
efficacy). Indeed, analyzing their interaction
allows for a more complete view of their effects
on self-efficacy. For instance, Figure 2 shows
that cognitive style does have an effect on
perceived opportunity identification efficacy, but
only for individuals having a high preference for
risk.
Hypothesis 6b, however, was not supported
by our data, indicating that analytic individuals
with a high preference for risk do not
systematically exhibit higher levels of
relationship self-efficacy, managerial selfefficacy, and tolerance self-efficacy than
intuitive individuals having a low preference for
risk. On the one hand, the interactive effects of
cognitive style and risk preference were not
significant for managerial self-efficacy beliefs,
possibly because of the composition of our
sample (management students), an issue that we
addressed earlier. On the other hand, even when
the interactions were significant (i.e., for
relationship self-efficacy and tolerance selfefficacy), the effects were not as we expected.
Figures 3 and 4 show the pattern of the
interactive role of cognitive style and risk
preference on perceived relationship selfefficacy and perceived tolerance self-efficacy,
respectively. As is indicated, it seems that
analytic
individuals
tend
to
exhibit
systematically stronger perceptions of these two
types of entrepreneurial self-efficacy, which is
consistent with our findings for hypothesis 2b.
However, it appears that the difference between
intuitive and analytic individuals’ perceptions
concerning these types of self-efficacy are much
more significant among individuals with high
preferences for risk than among individuals with
low preferences for risk. Although this is
consistent with our observation that cognitive
style may foster or inhibit the effects of risk
preference, these counterintuitive results should
be analyzed with caution and further
investigated by future research.
In sum, the testing of our hypotheses and
the careful analysis of our findings contribute to
the literature on entrepreneurship by adding
some important pieces to our conceptual map of
the cognitive antecedents of entrepreneurial

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 99
intentions.
It adds to the literature on
entrepreneurial
risk and cognition
by
investigating the interactive role of risk
preference and cognitive style on self-efficacy
beliefs related to the venture creation process, as
well as on entrepreneurial intentions. Therefore,
it helps to provide a more complete view of the
cognitive factors
that influence one’s
entrepreneurial intentions and, eventually, one’s
decision to engage in entrepreneurship. The
current study, however, has several limitations
that we address in the next section.
Limitations
Our study, like most studies on
entrepreneurial intentionality, has several
limitations. First, even though implications for
practice can be inferred, it is clear that we
assessed students’ perceptions, and not
entrepreneurs’ behaviors. Using a sample of
students is justified, in our case, because we
focus on factors that may affect the
intentionality of potential entrepreneurs toward
entrepreneurial behavior. That is, since one of
the main interests of the study was focused on
how entrepreneurs emerge (intentions process),
we wanted to investigate the extent to which
critical preconditions facilitate or inhibit this
emergence (e.g., N. F. Krueger, Reilly, &
Carsrud, 2000).
In cognitive psychology,
intention is the cognitive state immediately prior
to executing a behavior. The dominant class of
formal intentions models employs critical
antecedents of intentions.
For example,
intentions require the belief that the behavior is
achievable (e.g., self-efficacy). Empirically,
intentions are consistently the single best
predictor of subsequent behavior because any
planned behavior is, by definition, intentional.
This suggests that our understanding of
relatively rare behaviors such as starting a
venture will be enhanced by a richer
understanding of the causally-prior intentions.
In turn, we need to focus on the critical
antecedents and students who are currently at the
stage of assessing their own cognitive style and
perceiving their own beliefs in achieving many
of the critical skills and abilities associated with
entrepreneurial intentions. This approach is also
away from retrospective data collection
techniques (entrepreneurial sample) whereby it
may be difficult for the entrepreneurs to identify

100 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies
their cognitive style and self-efficacy post hoc
the creation of a new venture (Gaglio & Katz,
2001). Although there is a great deal of
previous research establishing the reasonable
linkage between intentions and later behavior
(Icek Ajzen, 1991; Zhao, Seibert, & Hills,
2005), we acknowledge that intentionality,
however, does not automatically imply behavior.
Second, causality cannot be assumed. Even
though throughout this study cognitive style and
risk preference appear as ‘antecedents’ of selfefficacy and intentionality, the causal relations
linking these constructs can only be inferred, at
most, and remain to be clearly demonstrated by
future research.
Third, the data in this study is self-reported.
While self-report surveys are the typical
mechanism for assessing and understanding
certain individual differences, such as selfefficacy, and it can be argued that an accurate
assessment of constructs such as cognitive style
and intentions must occur from the individual, it
is important to acknowledge that the data in this
study all came from a common source. This
may have potentially negative implications,
especially common method variance. Common
method variance is a methodological issue that
affects many studies in social sciences and
generates great debate (e.g., Doty & Glick,
1998; Spector, 2006). Our findings are subject
to this limitation and must be interpreted as
such. We agree with Pedhazur and Schmelkin
(1991) in that “it is only a multimethod approach
that holds the promise of separating effects due
to methods from those that appear to be due to
the independent variables of interest.” (Pedhazur
& Schmelkin, 1991, p. 276). Multimethod
approaches, unfortunately, are rare in
entrepreneurship research and may not be viable
when assessing constructs such as the ones we
addressed in the current study.
Common
method variance remains, therefore, a
formidable challenge for future research on
entrepreneurial cognition.
Finally, we restricted our examination to a
limited set of factors. In particular, and as most
studies on entrepreneurial intentionality, our
study overlooked situational factors that may be
preponderant in the decision of starting a
business. This does not affect the validity of our
findings, but should serve as a remainder against
misinterpretations.
Indeed, the association

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul
between personal traits and perceptions of selfefficacy and intentionality may be moderated
and even fully mediated by different situational
factors. In this sense, our findings should be
taken with caution, as a contribution to establish
a more general map of the cognitive processes
that may enhance or inhibit entrepreneurial
intentions. Future research should combine both
personal and situational variables in order to
obtain a more complete picture of the processes
that may lead to entrepreneurial behavior.

Implications and Areas for Future
Research
The current study has useful implications
for both academic entrepreneurial research and
entrepreneurial
education
of
potential
entrepreneurs.
In terms of entrepreneurial
research, this study has contributed to the
growing body of knowledge on antecedents of
entrepreneurial self-efficacy and entrepreneurial
intentions by identifying the role of cognitive
style and risk preference.
Future research
should continue to utilize theoretically-grounded
frameworks to select and investigate other
individual differences that may lead to
entrepreneurial
efficacy
and
increased
entrepreneurial intentions. Our understanding of
entrepreneurial self-efficacy and intentions has
to a large extent been guided by Ajzen’s (1991)
theory of planned behavior (TPB). According to
the TPB, attitudes, subjective norms and
perceived
behavioral
control
determine
intentions.
Intentions, in turn, along with
perceived behavioral control, determine actual
behavior. Empirical testing of entrepreneurial
intentions has found support for the TPB model
(for a review, see Kolvereid, 1996; N. F.
Krueger, Reilly, & Carsrud, 2000). Additional
individual difference antecedents including
entrepreneurial intensity, proactive personality,
and specific facets of subjective norms should be
further investigated.
In terms of contribution to the field of
entrepreneurial education, this study provides
evidence that there are valid individual
differences
in
potential
and
nascent
entrepreneurs that are important to recognize
and acknowledge, as they have potential
consequences for entrepreneurial efficacy and
intentions. We echo the suggestion presented by

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference
Zhao et al. (2005), who call for greater attention
and need for diverse learning experiences in
entrepreneurial education. Such diverse learning
experiences will increase the likelihood that the
educational
experience
for
potential
entrepreneurs will be a good “fit” for those with
differing cognitive styles.
Another implication for entrepreneurial
research and entrepreneurial education lies in a
closer examination of the concept of risk. While
this study has followed in the footsteps of
previous research looking at the role of risk
propensity and has added to this area of research
by examining both the separate and interactive
effects of risk preference and cognitive style,
more research is needed to investigate the role of
differing types of risk and ways that such risk
can be avoided or dealt with successfully (e.g.,
missing the boat vs. sinking the boat risks;
Dickson & Giglierano, 1986).
Our findings suggest that potential
entrepreneurs with high risk preferences and an
intuitive cognitive style are more likely to start
new businesses than individuals with a more
analytic thinking or lower risk preferences.
However, our findings also suggest that
individuals with a more analytic thinking believe
they are better prepared to execute the activities
necessary to the development and survival of a
new business.
This is consistent with
Venkataraman’s
assertion that
“analysis
increases a new business’s chance of success but
decreases the probability of creating a business
in the first place” (Venkataraman, 2002,
Principle 2). Further research is necessary to
verify the validity of such propositions, by
examining not only perceptions, but also actual
behavior.
In particular, the link between intuition,
analysis, and venture outcome, has yet to be
explored. Previous research has indicated that
entrepreneurs make an intensive use of cognitive
heuristics, which are intuitive tools that enable
entrepreneurs to make decisions and react
quickly in changing markets (L. Busenitz &
Barney, 1997; L. W. Busenitz, 1999; Palich &
Bagby, 1995). However, the question whether
such cognitive heuristics ultimately contribute to
venture success or, instead, generate biases and
pitfalls that reduce performance, remains open.
Further research should also examine the
causal relationships among the variables

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 101
presented in this study. For instance, the
relationship between self-efficacy and risk
preference deserves to be treated in more detail.
In the framework we adopted from Sitkin and
Pablo (1992), risk preference is a determinant of
risk propensity and risk behavior. In this sense,
it is conceived as a personal trait. However,
other scholars have suggested that preferences
are in fact determined by perceptions of risks
and benefits (Weber, Blais, & Betz, 2002).
Moreover, previous research has also shown that
self-efficacy beliefs do affect risk taking (N.
Krueger & Dickson, 1994). The question if selfefficacy impacts risk preferences, or if instead
risk preferences determine self-efficacy, is
therefore of particular interest.

Conclusion
Our research addressed the role of
cognition and risk preferences on self-efficacy
and entrepreneurial intentions.
Empirical
evidence of the interaction between cognitive
style and risk preferences was presented, as well
as of their influence on intentionality and
different types of self-efficacy. Implications for
entrepreneurship research and education were
drawn upon articulations of theory, empirical
findings, and a detailed discussion of our
hypotheses. While much work remains to be
done, we hope that our findings give
entrepreneurship scholars and educators yet
another perspective on the complex role of
cognitive style and risk preference in
understanding an individual’s self-efficacy
beliefs and entrepreneurial intentions. This
understanding, in turn, can assist us in
developing the appropriate curriculum and
pedagogy to support a nascent entrepreneur’s
pursuit of creating and growing a venture, which
may ultimately enable the creation of new
profitable and sustainable solutions for the
marketplace.

References
Ajzen, I. (1991). The Theory of Planned
Behavior. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 50, 179-211.

102 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies
Ajzen, I. (2002). Perceived behavioural control,
self-efficacy, locus of control, and the
theory of planned behavior. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 32(4), 665-683.
Allinson, C. W., Chell, E., & Hayes, J. (2000).
Intuition and entrepreneurial Behavior.
European
Journal
of
Work
and
Organizational Psychology, 9(1), 31-43.
Allinson, C. W., & Hayes, J. (1996). The
Cognitive style index: A Measure of
intuition-analysis
for
organizational
research. Journal of Management Studies,
33(1), 119-135.
Anna, A. L., Chandler, G. N., Jansen, E., &
Mero, N. P. (2000). Women business
owners in traditional and non-traditional
industries. Journal of Business Venturing,
15, 279-303.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social Foundations of
Thought and Action. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-Efficacy: The Exercise
of Control. New York: Freeman & Co.
Publishers.
Baron, R. A. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in
entrepreneurship:
Why
and
when
Entrepreneurs think differently than other
people. Journal of Business Venturing,
13(4), 275-294.
Boyd, N. G., & Vozikis, G. S. (1994). The
Influence of Self-Efficacy on the
Development of Entrepreneurial Intentions
and Actions. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 63-77.
Brockhaus, R. H. S. (1980). Risk taking
propensity of entrepreneurs. Academy of
Management Journal, 23(3), 509-520.
Busenitz, L., & Barney, J. B. (1997).
Differences between entrepreneurs and
managers in large organizations: Biases and
heuristics in strategic decision-making.
Journal of Business Venturing, 12(1), 9-30.
Busenitz, L. W. (1999). Entrepreneurial risk and
strategic decision making: It’s a matter of
perspective. The Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science, 35(3), 325-340.

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul
Chen, C. C., Greene, P. G., & Crick, A. (1998).
Does
entrepreneurial
self-efficacy
distinguish entrepreneurs from managers?
Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 295316.
Cole, M. S., Field, H. S., & Harris, S. G. (2004).
Student
learning
motivation
and
psychological hardiness: Interactive effects
on students’ reactions to a management
class. Academy of Management Learning &
Education, 3(1), 64-85.
DeNoble, A. F., Jung, D., & Ehrlich, S. B.
(1999). Entrepreneurial self-efficacy: The
development of a measure and its
relationship to entrepreneurial action. In W.
D. B. R.D. Reynolds, S. Manigart, Cm.
Mason, G.D. Meyer, H.J. Sapienza & K.G.
Shaver (Ed.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research (pp. 73-87). Waltham, MA: P&R
Publications Inc.
Dickson, P. R., & Giglierano, J. J. (1986).
Missing the Boat and Sinking the Boat: A
Conceptual Model of Entrepreneurial Risk.
Journal of Marketing, 50(3), 58-70.
Doty, D. H., & Glick, W. H. (1998). Common
Methods Bias: Does Common Methods
Variance
Really
Bias
Results?
.
Organizational Research Methods, 1(4),
374-406
Gaglio, C. M., & Katz, J. (2001). The
psychological
basis
of
opportunity
identification: Entrepreneurial alertness.
Small Business Economics, 16, 95-111.
Hogarth, R. (1987). Judgment and Choice: The
Psychology of Decision (2nd ed.).
Chichester, New York, Brisbane, Toronto:
John Wiley & Sons.
Judge, T. A., & Ilies, R. (2002). Relationship of
personality to performance motivation: A
meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 87(4), 797-807.
Kahneman, D. (2003). Maps of Bounded
Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral
Economics. The American Economic
Review, 93(5), 1449-1475.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and
biases. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Cognitive Style and Risk Preference
Keh, H. T., Foo, M. D., & Lim, B. C. (2002).
Opportunity Evaluation under Risky
Conditions: The Cognitive Processes of
Entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice, 27(2), 125-148.
Kickul, J., Gundry, L., & Whitcanack, L. (2005).
Intuition
versus
Analysis?:
Testing
differential models of cognitive style on
entrepreneurial
self-efficacy
and
intentionality. Paper presented at the 2005
Ivey Conference on Information Processing
and Entrepreneurial Cognition Conference,
London, Ontario.
Kihlstrom, R. E., & Laffont, J.-J. (1979). A
general equilibrium theory of firm
formation based on risk aversion. Journal
of Political Economy, 87(4), 719-748.
Kolvereid, L. (1996). Prediction of employment
status choice intentions. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 21(1), 47-57.
Krueger, N. (1993). The impact of prior
entrepreneurial exposure on perceptions of
new venture feasibility and desirability.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
18(1), 5-21.
Krueger, N., & Dickson, P. R. (1994). How
Believing in Ourselves Increases Risk
Taking: Perceived Self-Efficacy and
Opportunity
Recognition.
Decision
Sciences, 25(3), 385-400.
Krueger, N. F., & Kickul, J. (2006). So You
Thought the Intentions Model Was Simple?
Navigating
the
Complexities
and
Interactions of Cognitive Style, Culture,
Gender, Social Norms, and Intensity on the
Pathway to Entrepreneurship. Paper
presented at the 2006 United States
Association
Small
Business
and
Entrepreneurship Conference.
Krueger, N. F., Reilly, M. D., & Carsrud, A. L.
(2000). Entrepreneurial intentions: A
competing models approach. Journal of
Business Venturing, 15(5/6), 411-432.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Wehrung, D. A. (1985).
A portfolio of risk measures. Theory and
Decision, 19, 1-29.
Markman, G. D., Balkin, D. B., & Baron, R. A.
(2002). Inventors and New Venture
Formation: the Effects of General SelfEfficacy
and
Regretful
Thinking.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
27(2), 149-165.

Volume 13, Number 2, 2007 103
Miner, J. B. (1997). A psychological typology of
successful entrepreneurs. London: Quorum
Books.
Mitchell, R. K., Busenitz, L., Lant, T.,
McDougall, P. P., Morse, E. A., & Smith, J.
B. (2002). Toward a theory of
entrepreneurial cognition: rethinking the
people side of entrepreneurship research.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
27(2), 93-104.
Mullins, J. W., & Forlani, D. (2005). Missing
the boat or sinking the boat: a study of new
venture decision making. Journal of
Business Venturing, 20, 47-69.
Nickerson, R., Perkins, D., & Smith, E. (1985).
The teaching of thinking. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Olson, P. D. (1995). Entrepreneurship: Process
and abilities. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 10(1), 25-32.
Ornstein, R. E. (1977). The psychology of
consciousness. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Palich, L. E., & Bagby, R. D. (1995). Using
cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial
risk-taking:
challenging
conventional
wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10,
425-438.
Pedhazur, E. J., & Schmelkin, L. P. (1991).
Measurement, Design, and Analysis: An
Integrated Approach. Hillsdale, New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Phillips, J. M., & Gully, S. M. (1997). Role of
goal orientation, ability, need for
achievement, and locus of control in the
self-efficacy and goal-setting process.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 792802.
Reynolds, P. (2000). National PSED of U. S.
business
startups:
Background
and
methodology. In J. A. Katz (Ed.), Advances
in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and
Growth (Vol. 4, pp. 153-227). Stamford,
CT: JAI Press.
Shaver, K. G., & Scott, L. R. (1991). Person,
Process, Choice: The Psychology of New
Venture Creation. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice, 16(2), 23-45.
Simon, M., Houghton, S. M., & Aquino, K.
(2000). Cognitive biases, risk perception,
and venture formation: how individuals
decide to start companies. Journal of
Business Venturing, 15(2), 113-134.

104 Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. (1992).
Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk
behavior. Academy of Management Review,
17(1), 9-38.
Spector, P. E. (2006). Method Variance in
Organizational Research Organizational
Research Methods, 9(2), 221-232
Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1998). Selfefficacy and work-related performance: A
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
124(2), 240-261.
Venkataraman, S. (2002). Ten Principles of
Entrepreneurial Creation. Batten Briefings,
1(1).

Barbosa, Gerhardt, & Kickul
Weber, E. U., Blais, A.-R., & Betz, N. E. (2002).
A Domain-specific Risk-attitude Scale:
Measuring Risk Perceptions and Risk
Behaviors. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 15, 263-290.
Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. (2005).
The Mediating Role of Self-Efficacy in the
Development of Entrepreneurial Intentions.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(6),
1265-1272.

i

For a critique of the measurement of risk propensity,
see (Shaver & Scott, 1991).

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

