Tolerance of Ambiguity and Use
of Second Language Strategies
Christopher M. Ely
Ball State University
ABSTRACT This study developed a scale of
tolerance of ambiguity (as an aspect of personality or cognitive style) related to second
language learning. The scale was used to discover if tolerance of ambiguity influences
students’ use of various second language
strategies. The research was carried out with
students of Spanish at the university level. Multiple regression analysis provided partial confirmation of several specific hypotheses regarding
tolerance of ambiguity. Strength of motivation,
attitude, and concernfor grade were alsofound
to influence use of strategies.

Second language learning is fraught with
uncertainty. Seldom do we know the precise
meaning of a new lexical item, understand the
exact temporal reference of a second language
verb form, or feel that we are pronouncing an L2
sound with total accuracy. Given the pervasiveness of uncertainty-or, to use the psychological
term, “ambiguity’Lin second language learning, we may well be interested in determining:
(1) the degree to which students are “intolerant”
or “tolerant” of such ambiguity and (2) whether
and how students’ feelings about this ambiguity influence L2 learning.
Christopher M. Ely (Ph. D., Stanford University) is an
Associate Professor of English at Ball State University,
Muncie, Indiana.
Foreign Language Annals, 22, No. 5 , 1989

In considering “tolerance of ambiguity” we
are faced with the issue of whether to consider
personality or cognitive style variables as being
relatively stable or as varying according to the
situation.2 Until fairly recently, most psychologists have held that one’s characteristics are
relatively consistent from one situation to
another. In the last several decades, however, a
small but influential group of personality researchers (see, e.g., Mischel, 22, 23, 24; Endler,
17) has found that it is not always possible to use
“global” (general) personality instruments to
predict how an individual will behave in a certain
environment.
The need to operationalize personality
variables in the specific context of second
language learning has been addressed previously
by Ely (14, 16). A major purpose of the study
reported here is to extend the situation-specific
approach to the consideration of tolerance of
ambiguity.
In addition, the study deals with a second problem: the need to learn more about the processes
through which personality or cognitive style
variables influence language learning outcomes.
One approach to this question is to measure the
impact of these variables on overall classroom participation (see, eg., Naiman et. al., 25; Ely, 14).
Alternatively, one can examine the way in which
such variables influence students’ specific second

437

43 8

FOREIGN LANGUAGE ANNALS - OCTOBER 1989

language learning and communication
“strategies? Although second language strategies
have been the focus of many recent studies,
relatively little attention has been paid to possible links between personality or cognitive style
characteristics and the use of such ~trategies.~
It is the second purpose of the present research, then, to explore situation-specific
tolerance of ambiguity as a possible antecedent
of strategy use.
Tolerance of Ambiguity
In second language research, two of the commonly-used tolerance of ambiguity instruments
are those developed by Budner (8) and Norton
(26).5 (Neither of these scales is specifically
concerned with language learning settings.)
Budner defined intolerance of ambiguity as “the
tendency to perceive...ambiguous situations as
sources of threat” (p. 29). Norton conceived of
intolerance of ambiguity as: “a tendency to
perceive or interpret information marked by
vague, incomplete, fragmented, multiple, probable, unstructured, uncertain, inconsistent, contrary, contradictory, or unclear meanings as actual or potential sources of psychological
discomfort or threat” (p. 608).
In their comprehensivestudy of the predictors
of language achievement, Naiman et al. (25)
used Budner’s global scale with English-speaking Canadian high school students of French.
Eighth-grade students who were more tolerant of
ambiguity performed better on both receptive
and productive language tests. Chapelle (9)
(also see Chapelle and Roberts, lo), utilizing
Norton’s scale, found that global tolerance of
ambiguity was a predictor of final TOEFL scores
of ESL university students (other independent
variables entering the regression were semesterinitial TOEFL scores, field independence, and
anxiety).
Reiss (34) found a positive relationship between tolerance of ambiguity and university
foreign language students’ ratings of themselves
as language learners. Although Reiss measured
tolerance of ambiguity with three situationspecific items, she apparently did not attempt to
construct a psychometrically reliable tolerance
of ambiguity instrument.

Second Language Strategies
The study of second language “learning strategies” is motivated largely by a desire to identify
characteristics of successful language learners.
The field was opened by Rubin (35; see also 36)
and Stern (37) in their discussion of strategies
which they felt characterized the “good”
language learner. These included: a willingness
and ability to guess, looking for patterns in
linguistic meaning and form, experimentation,
practicing, supervisingone‘s own language learning, and monitoring one’s production.
A second major strand of strategy investigation, that of “communication strategies:’ focuses
on the nonnative speaker as a producer (and
receiver) of language. Communication strategy
research seeks to identify strategies employed by
nonnative speakers in attempting to convey and
process information in the second language.
In their investigation of the nature of second
language strategies, certain researchers have
chosen to carry out their central analysis at the
level of individual strategies. Naiman et al. (25),
for example, interviewed superior adult language
learners to discover their specific strategies, and
also found that particular classroom strategiesof
secondary school learners of French predicted
language achievement. Politzer (30) has discovered interesting relationships between university foreign language students’ use of a large
number of strategies and language learning, as
measured by grades and instructor evaluations.
Politzer and McGroarty (33) also have found
significant associations between use of certain
strategies and the improvement of ESL students
on standardized tests.
Other researchers have examined strategies
within groupings, categories, or typologies.
Bialystok ( 2 ) , for instance, examined four
strategy categories: “formal practice:’ “functional practic4’ “monitoring:’ and “inferencing”
(each category was further divided into “oral”
and “written” sub-categories). With Canadian
high school students of French, Bialystok found
that the impact of strategy use varied according
to the language skill being tested.6 Reiss (34)
assessed university foreign language students’ use
of strategies in such categoriesas guessing, attending to form, practicing, monitoring, attending

439

FOREIGN LANGUAGE ANNALS - OCTOBER 1989

to meaning, and using mnemonic devices. She
found that students who had rated themselves as
good language learners reported use of each of
the strategy categories7 O’Malley and his colleagues (e.g., 28) have divided a large number of
strategies into “metacognitiv$’ “cognitive’ and
“social” categories. Wenden (e.g., 39) has examined ways in which learners consider, plan,
and evaluatetheir language learning and strategy
use. Oxford (e.g., 29) has employed factor
analysis to isolate five key strategy clusters,
namely, those involving: “general study habits:’
“functional practice:’ “search for and communication of meaning:’ “studying or practicing
alone” (including practicing rules), and using
“mnemonic or memory devices? Studies focusing on communication strategies, such as those
of Tarone (e.g., 38), Bialystok (3) and Faerch and
Kasper (e.g., IS), have also typically endeavored
to place strategies within typologically discrete
categories.

are high in tolerance of ambiguity. It is thus expected that students who are relatively intolerant
of ambiguity will cling to the L1, and also will be
uncomfortable if they skip over what appear to
be essential bits of information in their study or
in their classroom work; students high in
tolerance of ambiguity are expected to be more
willing to deal with the L2 on its own terms, and
concentrate on the overall message being communicated (rather than on the smaller details of
the language).

Procedure
Students enrolled in second- and third-year
university Spanish classes comprised the sample
for this study. There were six classes, with a total
of 84 students: two second-year classes (n=26)
and four third-year classes (n= 58).
Students were asked, during class time, to
complete the tolerance of ambiguity and
strategies instruments. They were told that participation in the study was voluntary, that the
questionnaires would be filled out anonymousResearch Questions
The first question addressed in this study was ly, and that their teachers would not see the
the feasibility of designing a situation-specifictol- results of the questionnaires.*
erance of ambiguity scale. Tolerance/intolerance
The tolerance of ambiguity items were written
of ambiguity in second language learning, as by the investigator, based upon his language
operationalized in this study, is the relative degree learning and teaching experience and upon a
of discomfort associated with thinking: that one review of the literature on tolerance of ambiguity.
does not know or understand exact meaning; that A major criterion in the design of the tolerance
one is not able to express one‘s ideas accurately or of ambiguity scale was that items should repreexactly; that one is dealing with overly-complex sent a broad spectrum of language activities:
language; that there is a lack of correspondence listening, speaking, reading, writing, pronunciabetween the L1 and the L2.
tion, and grammar. Students rated the items
The second research question in the study was using a six point Likert-scale, with possible
the relationship between tolerance of ambigui- responses of “strongly disagree:’ “moderately
ty and strategy use. It was theorized that a stu- disagree:’ “slightly disagree:’ slightly agree:’
dent’s use of strategies (in addition to being the “moderately agree:’ and “strongly agree:’
result of prior experience and of other factors)
Included with the tolerance of ambiguity scale
is influenced by tolerance of ambiguity in the were items representing three other scales (in adfollowing two ways: 1) relatively lower toler- dition to foil items): strength of motivation, atance of ambiguity leads to relatively greater re- titude toward studying Spanish (e.g., whether it
liance upon the L1 when using the language, and is considered interesting or boring), and desire
a relatively stronger tendency to relate L2 items for a “good” grade. The decision to include
to elements known in the L1; and 2) strategies strength of motivation and attitude toward studywhich focus on specific details are used more ing Spanish was prompted by a desire to explore
by students low in tolerance of ambiguity, while possible causal factors not included in the major
strategies which focus on understanding general hypotheses. l o
The strategy questionnaire presented a list of
meaning are utilized more by students who
93

440

FOREIGN LANGUAGE ANNALS - OCTOBER 1989

individual strategies, arranged under language
learning situations (e.g., “When I listen to the
teacher speaking Spanish: a. I pay attention to
the overall meaning; b. I pay attention to the
grammar and vocabulary). Although most of
the strategies investigated are traditionally considered to be “learning” strategies, it was decided
to include several “communicative” strategies as
well. (It should be noted, in fact, that many strategies can be considered to have both learning dnd
communicative functions;no theoretical distinction is made in this study between the two
categories of strategies.)I1 Students responded
to each strategy on a five-point Likert scale:
“neved’ “rarelg’ “sometimes:’ “often:’ and
“almost always? 12

d.

I try to make up a mental picture to help
me remember:
Tol. of ambig.: beta= .23
R2 = .lo
Str. of motiv.:
beta = .21
2. When I listen to the teacher speaking
Spanish:
a. I pay attention to the overall meaning:
Attitude toward
learning Spanish beta= .32
R2 = .10
b.
I pay attention to the grammar or
vocabulary:
R2 =.07
Str. of motiv.: beta= .27
3 . If the teacher corrects something I’ve
said:
a. I repeat the correct word or sentence:
Results
The first purpose of this study was to investi- Concern for grade: beta= .25
R2 = .06
gate the possibility of arriving at a tolerance of
b.
I make a mental note of the correction:
ambiguity scale with statisfactory psychometric
properties. To create the final tolerance of am- No sig. pred.
c.
I try to use the correct form the next
biguity scale, standard item-analysis procedures
time
I speak:
were followed (including the omission of items
with unacceptably low corrected item-total cor- Conc. for gr.: beta= .24
R2 = .06
relations). The final result was an instrument 4. After I learn a new Spanish word, I try to
consisting of 12 items (shown in Appendix A)
use it right away:
and having a reliability (Cronbach alpha) of .82.
R2 = .08
The second stage in the analysis was to regress Str. of motiv.: beta= .29
the strategies on tolerance of ambiguity, strength 5 . As I read something in Spanish:
of motivation, attitude toward learning the
a. I focus on getting the overall meaning:
language, and concern for grade. The following Att. toward lng. Sp.: beta= .32
R2 = .12
is a summary of the results for these regressions
Tol. of ambig.: beta= .21
(with the beta weights or standardized regression
b.
I try hard to understand each individual
coefficients and the amount of variance (R2)).
word:
(For ease of reference, the strategies are listed
here, along with the significant (p< .05) predic- No sig. pred.
tors entering the regression equations.)
6 . In speaking Spanish, I plan out exactly
what I’m going to say before I say it:
1. When I’m learning a new Spanish word:
Tol. of ambig.: beta=-.38
R2=.15
a. I try to associate it with a word that
sounds similar in Spanish or English 7 . In writing Spanish compositions:
No significant predictors
a. I think carefully about grammar as I
b. I try to associate it with another word
write each sentence:
that looks similar in Spanish or
Tol. of ambig.: beta= -.25
English:
R2 = .lI
Str. of motiv.:
beta = .23
No sig. pred.
b.
I use a word even when I’m not sure it’s
c. I try to memorize it by repeating it a
right:
number of times:
Tol. of ambig.: beta= -.23
~2=.05
No sig. pred.

FOREIGN LANGUAGE ANNALS - OCTOBER 1989

441

c. I look up words in the dictionary:
Conc. for gr.: beta= .34
R2 = .12
8. If I’m reading in Spanish and come across
an unknown word:
a . The first thing I do is look it up to
see what it means in English:

I proofread for spelling and accent
marks:
TO^. of ambig.: beta= .33
R2 = .15
Conc. for gr.: beta= .29
14. When other students are reading aloud in
class, I read along with them mentally:

Tol. of ambig.: beta= -.39
R2=.18
Att. toward lng. Sp.: beta= .25
b . the first thing 1 do is try to guess
what it means in English:
No sig. pred.
9. Outside the classroom I repeat Spanish
words and sentences to myself:
Str. of motiv.: beta=.38
R2 = .15
10. If I realize I’ve made a mistake when I’m
speaking, I go back and correct it:
Att. toward lng. Sp.: beta= .33
R2 = .ll
11. In reading Spanish, when I’m trying to
guess the meaning of a new word:
a . to help me guess, I think about the
overall meaning of the sentence or
passage:
No sig. pred.
b . to help me guess, I look for the similarity of the word to an English word:
Tol. of ambig.: beta= -.21
R2 = .05
c . to help me guess, I look at the individual parts of the word:
No. sig. pred.
12. When I’m listening to Spanish in the
classroom:
a . I try to understand every word I hear:
No sig. pred.
b . I try to “feel the sound” of Spanish
when I IistenL‘soaking in” the pronunciation, intonation and accent:
Str. of motiv.: beta= .26
R2 = .07
c . I let the meaning sink in slowly,
without really focusing on it:
No sig. pred.
13. If I’m writing something for class:
a . I go back after I’m done and check
my grammar:
Att. toward lng. Sp.: beta = .29
R2 = .08

Conc. for gr.: beta = .29
R2 = .08
15. In speaking, when I don’t quite know how
to express an idea:
a. I ask the teacher for the right words:
R2=.10
Tol. of ambig.: beta= -.32
b. I try to express the idea with Spanish
that I do know:
Att. toward lng. Sp.: beta= .34
R2 = .21
Conc. for gr.: beta= .29
c I change the topic:
No sig. pred.
16. I think about my pronunciation when I
speak Spanish:

b.

Str. of motiv.: beta= .30
R2 = .09
17. When I’m reading Spanish and find some
new or difficult grammar, I try to understand the grammar problem right away:
Str. of motiv.: beta= .28
R2 = .08
18. In listening to Spanish, when I hear a word
I don’t know:
a. I write it down:
No sig. pred.
b. I make a mental note of it:
Att. toward lng. Sp.: beta= .33
R2=.11
c. I ask the teacher about it:
No sig. pred.
d. I try to figure out what it means:

Str. of motiv.: beta= .28
R2 = .08
19. When I’m speaking and I’m not sure if
something will be correct:
a. I say it and then check to see if the
teacher corrects me:
Str. of motiv.: beta= .32
R2 = .10
b. I try to find out if it’s correct first before
I say it:
R2 = .07
Conc. for gr.: beta = .27

442
__-____

FOREIGN LANGUAGE ANNALS - OCTOBER 1989

c . I just say it and don’t think too much
about it:
Conc. for gr.: beta= -.26
R2=.17
Tol. of ambig.: beta= .29

ambiguity was not found to contribute
significantly to variance in looking for overall
meaning in listening (2a) and guessing word
meaning from context (lla).
In the case of two other strategies not
specificallyrelated to the research questions, inDiscussion
This study found that it is possible to develop teresting results regarding tolerance of ambiguity
an instrument which can measure the construct can be noted. When faced with the task of iearnof tolerance of ambiguity in the specific context ing new words, students high in tolerance of amof second language learning. The current scale, biguity were less likely to simply memorize the
consisting of 12 items representing various words through rote repetition (lc), but favored
aspects of language learning and use, was found the more creative technique of constructing
to have a high internal consistency. Further mental images to aid later recall (Id).
Although apriori hypotheses were not framed
development and refinement of the instrument
are planned.
regarding attitude toward the learning situation,
The predictions regarding tolerance of am- concern for grade, and strength of motivation,
biguity received support from the findings for the results involving these variables suggest relasome, but not all, of the strategies. In the case of tionships for future research. A positive attitude
strategies involving reliance on the L1, tolerance toward the learning situation would appear to
of ambiguity was indeed a significant negative generally facilitate a balanced approach to
predictor of looking for similarities between language learning, encouraging students to
new words and L1 words (strategy llb) and look- focus on the overall picture (in reading, 5a,
ing up words in English right away when reading speaking, 15b, and listening, 2a, (while remain(8a). There was no predictive relationship be- ing alert for new words, 18b)), but at the same
tween tolerance of ambiguity and guessing the time leading them to monitor their production
(in writing, 13a, and speaking, 10). A strong
meaning in English right away (Sb).
Tolerance of ambiguity, as hypothesized, was positive attitude may, however, (especially in
found to be a significant negative predictor of conjunction with a low tolerance of ambiguity),
various strategies which involve focusing on in- lead to an overly quick attempt to grasp meandividual language elements: planning out exactly ing (Sa). Students high in concern for grade seem
what to say ahead of time (6), thinking careful- to focus on correctness of production in speakly about grammar when writing (7a), looking up ing (3a, 3c, 19b, and 19c-negative prediction)
words in English right away when reading (Sa), and writing (76, 13b), but they also appear to
and asking teacher for the right words when have a strong desire to engage actively in learnspeaking (15a). Also, students high in tolerance ing (14) and to persist in communicativeattempts
of ambiguity did not mind speaking even when (15b). Strength of language learning motivation
they were unsure of possessing the correct may promote a desire to internalize language
language tools (19c). Level of tolerance of am- deeply (in writing, 7a, pronunciation, 12b and
biguity was not, however, a predictor of focusing 16, and listening, 18d), an interest in encounteron grammar or vocabulary when listening (2b), ing, mastering, and using new language items
focusing on individual words when reading (5b), (2b, 4,9, and 17), a willingness to create associaor trying to understand every word when listen- tions (Id), and an openness to teacher correcting (12a). Curiously, tolerance of ambiguity ness after an utterance has been completed (19a).
positively predicted proofreading one’s written
While there are a number of significant
predictors evidenced in the data, the amount of
work for spelling and accent marks (13b).
For strategies involving overall meaning, variance in the dependent variables is modest,
tolerance of ambiguity did in fact prove to be a averaging 10 percent. Although this is an imporsignificant positive predictor of looking for tant amount of variance, this figure indicates
overall meaning in reading (5a). Tolerance of that many other factors are also acting to

____
FOREIGN LANGUAGE ANNALS - OCTOBER 1989
influence use of strategies, including, perhaps,
prior training and practice in strategy use, as
well as other individual differences not measured
in the present study. It is hoped that further
research will be able to discover some of these
variables. In addition, future studies conducted
with populations differing in the laaguage situation and level from those of the present research
can be expected to produce additional insights
into the relationship between individual
characteristics and language learning.

Conclusion
Perhaps the central implication of this study
for language-teachingllearning theory and
pedagogy concerns the way in which teachers
view and present second language learning/
communication strategies. Although some
teachers are now becoming aware of the need
to recommend particular strategies to their
students (for example, saying “be sure to look for
overall meaning when you read”), often little
thought is given to individual learning styles and
personality characteristics. The present study
demonstrates a deeper dimension to the problem of strategy instruction. Teaching language
learning behavior is not, apparently, merely to
be accomplished by making students aware of
a strategy and its potential benefits, encouraging them to use it, and providing opportunities
to do so. We also should become aware of (and
take into account) underlying personality and
other affective variables which might tend to
inhibit or promote the acquisition of new ways
of approaching language learning tasks. After
assessment of these variables, we will be better
able to make informed judgments about strategy
development. In addition, we may wish to provide activities which might be able to alter the
classroom-specific characteristics we have
dis~overed’~
(although a good deal of research
is needed in this area). As we become more
knowledgeable about the personal characteristics
of students that may promote or inhibit the
adoption of various learning processes, we will
move more quickly toward that desideratum
of helping our students become “good language
learners?

443

NmES
‘This research was supported by a grant from the
Office of Research, Ball State University. This study
would not have been possible without the kind and enthusiastic support of Rita Gardiol, Chair of the
Department of Foreign Languages at Ball State, and
the advice and assistance of the following members of
that department: Douglas Barnette, Linda Barnette,
James Brown, Robert Fritz, Permilla Jenkins, and
Alazne Landa.
2Toleranceof ambiguity is considered by various
researchers to be either a personality or cognitive style
variable (or both).
3Asituation-specific tolerance of ambiguity instrument was developed by Chapelle (9), but she considered the scale to be “somewhat suspect as a consistent measure of [tolerance of ambiguity]:’ since the
original 13-item scale had to be reduced to 4 items in
order to obtain a reliability level of .54 (Cronbach
alpha) (p. 47). This scale was not apparently used in
Chapelle’s subsequent analysis.
4Fieldindependence and reflectivity (measured as
global constructs) have been found to be significantly correlated with monitoring (Abraham, 1)and working styles on computers (from which learning styles
were inferred (Jamieson and Chapelle (21)). Also see
related studies by Brown (7) and by Ehrman and Oxford (12,13). Regarding Ehrman and Oxford (13), Oxford suggests (personal communication) that “[MyersBriggs] ‘perceivers’ would seem to have a high
tolerance for ambiguity, while ‘judgers’ would not?
5Theconstruct of tolerance of ambiguity was first
explored by Frenkel-Brunswik (e.g., 19).
%ee also Bialystok and Frohlich (4). Related
research has been conducted by Huang and Van
Naerssen (20) in China.
7Studentswho rated themselves high as language
learners also tended to be tolerant of ambiguity.
However, a causal investigation of personality and
strategy use was not carried out.
*Thedata were gathered several weeks prior to the
end of a ten-week term in 1987.
gRe~earchby Politzer (31, 32) found integrative
motivation and instrumental motivation related to
students’ use of various languagelearning strategies.
‘OFor a discussion of the development of the
strength of motivation and concern for grade scales,
see Ely (14, 15). The attitude toward studyingSpanish
scale employed two items assessing students’ interest
or lack of interest in learning the language.
“For further discussion of this point, see, e.g.,
Bialystok (3, pp. 100-03).

FOREIGN LANGUAGE ANNALS - OCTOBER 1989

444--_.--

I2Although the use of self-report data in the
measurement of individual differences and learning
strategies is a common research procedure, there is
much discussion about the relative merits of this (and
other) data-gathering methods. See, e.g., Cohen (ll),
Ely (14), Politzer (30), and Oxford (29).
i30maggio(27) (see also Birckbichler and Omaggio,
5) presents a number of interestingclassroom activities
designed to address such characteristics as low
tolerance of ambiguity, execessive impulsiveness,lack
of flexibility,and lack of organization.
REFERENCES
1. Abraham, Roberta G. “Relationships between

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

Use of the Strategy of Monitoring and Cognitive
Style? Studies in Second Language Acquisition 6
(1983): 17-32.
Bialystok, Ellen. “The Role of Conscious Strategies in Second Language Proficiencyl’Modern
Language Journal 65 (1981): 24-35.
. “Some Factors in the Selection and
Implementation of Communication Strategies:’
in Claus Faerch and Gabriele Kasper, eds.,
Strategies in Interlanguage Communication. New
York: Longman, 1983.
and Maria Frohlich. “Variables of
Classroom Achievement in Second Language
Learning? Modern Language Journal 62 (1978):
327-36.
Birckbichler, Diane W. and Alice C. Omaggio.
“Diagnosing and Responding to Individual
Learner Needs!’ Modern Language Journal 62
(1978): 336-45.
Brown, H. Douglas. Principles of Language
Learning and Teaching. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1987.
. Presentation at colloquium on
Myers-Briggs Personality Types and Second
Language Learning Strategies, 1988 Annual
TESOL Convention, Chicago.
Budner, Stanley. “Intolerance of Ambiguity as a
Personality Variable? Journal of Personality 30
(1962): 29-50.
Chapelle, Carol. “The Relationshipbetween Ambiguity Tolerance and Success in Acquiring
English as a Second Language in Adult Learners!’
Dissertation, University of Illinois, 1983.
and Cheryl Roberts. “Ambiguity
Tolerance and Field Independence as Predictors
of Proficiency in English as a Second Language?
Language Learning 36 (1986): 27-45.
Cohen, Andrew D. “Studying Learner Strategies:
How We Get the Information:’ in Anita Wenden

and Joan Rubin, eds., Learner Strategies in
Language Learning. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1987.
12. Ehrman, Madeleine and Rebecca Oxford. Presentation at colloquium on Myers-Briggs Personality
Types and Second Language Learning Strategies,
1988 Annual TESOL Convention, Chicago.
13.
. “Ants and Grasshoppers, Badgers
and Butterflies: Quantitative and QualitativeExploration of Adult Language Learning Styles and
Strategies? Presentation at Conference on
Research Perspectivesin Adult Language Learning and Acquisition, Ohio State University, 1988.
14. Ely, Christopher M. “An Analysis of Discomfort,
Risktaking, Sociability,and Motivation in the L2
Classroom? Language Learning 36 (1986): 1-25.
. “Language Learning Motivation:
15.
A Descriptive and Causal Analysis? Modern
Language Journal 70 (1986): 28-35.
16.
f‘Personality: Its Impact on Attitudes toward Classroom Activities? Foreign
Language Annals 21 (1988): 25-32.
17. Endler, Norman S. “The Person Versus the
Situation-a Pseudo Issue? A Response to
AlkeZ’ Journalof Personality 41 (1973): 287-303.
18. Faerch, Claus and Gabriele Kasper. “Plans and
Strategiesin Foreign Language Communication:’
in Claus Faerch and Gabriele Kasper, eds.,

Strategies in Interlanguage Communication.
New York: Longman, 1983.
19. Frenkel-Brunswik, Else. “Intolerance of Ambiguity as an Emotional and Perceptual Personality Variable? Journal of Personality 18
(1949): 108-43.
20. Huang, Xiao-Hua and Margaret Van Naerssen.
“Learning Strategies for Oral Communication?
Applied Linguistics 8 (1987): 287-307.
21. Jamieson, Joan and Carol Chapelle. “Working
Styles on Computers as Evidence of Second
Language Learning Strategies? Language Learning 37 (1987): 523-44.
22. Mischel, Walter. Personality and Assessment.
New York: Wiley, 1968.
. “The Interaction of Person and
23.
Situation:’ in David Magnusson and Norman S.
Endler, eds., Personality at the Crossroads: Current Issues in InteractionalPsychology. Hillsdale,
NJ.: Erlbaum, 1977.
24.
. “Personality and Cognition:
SomethingBorrowed, SomethingNew?” in Nancy Cantor and John F. Kihlstrorn, eds., Personality, Cognition and Social Interaction. Hillsdale,
N.J.: Erlbaum, 1981.

~ ~ LANGUAGE
FOREIGN
_ _ _
ANNALS
_ - OCTOBER 1989
25. Naiman, Neil, Maria Frohlich, H.H. Stern, and
Angela Todesco. The Good Language Learner.
Research in Education Series No. 7. Toronto: The
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, 1978.
26. Norton, Robert W. “Measurement of Ambiguity Tolerance? J40urnalof Personality Assessment
39 (1975): 607-19.
27. Omaggio, Alice C. Helpingkamers Succeed Activitiesfor the Foreign Language Clamroom. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics, 1981.
28. O’Malley, J. Michael, Anna Uhl Chamot, Gloria
Stewner-Manzanares,Lisa Kupper, and Rocco P.
Russo. “LearningStrategies Used by Beginning and
Intermediate ESL Students!’ Language
Learning 35 (1985): 21-46.
29. Oxford, Rebecca L. Second Language Learning

Strategies: Current Research and Implicationsfor
hctice. Los An,geles: Center for LanguageEducation and Research, University of California, Los
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.

Angeles, 1986.
Politzer, Robert L. “An Exploratory Study of Self
Reported Language Learning Behaviorsand their
Relation to Achievement!’ Studies in Second
Language Acquisition 6 (1983): 54-68.
. “Motivation, Language Learning
Behavior and Achievement in an Intensive ESL
Course!’ Undated manuscript.
. “Linguistic and Communicative
CompetenceAchievement in Relationto Reported
Motivation and Learning Behaviors in an Intensive
EFL Course!’ Undated manuscript.
and Mary McGroarty. “An Exploratory Study of Learning Behaviors and their
Relationship to Gains in Linguistic and Communicative Competence? TESOL Quarterly 19
(1985): 103-23.
Reiss, Mary-Ann. “The Good Language Learner:
Another Look!’ The Canadian Modern Language
Review 41 (1985): 511-23.
Rubin, Joan. “What the ‘Good Language Learner’
Can Teach Us!’ TESOL Quarterly 9 (1975): 41-51.
. “Study of Cognitive Processes in
Second Language Learning!’ Applied Linguistics
2 (1981): 117-31.
Stern, H.H. “What Can We Learn from the Good
Language Learner?” The Canadian Modern
Language Review 31 (1975): 304-18.
Tarone, Elaine. “Some Thoughts on the Notion of
Communication Strategy’.’ TESOL Quarterly 15
(1981): 285-95.
Wenden, Anita.“Literature Review:The Process of
Intervention!’ Language Learning 33 (1983): 103-21.

445

APPENDIX A
Tolerance of Ambiguity Scale*
1. When I’m reading in Spanish, I get
somewhat impatient when I don’t totally
understand the meaning. (I)
2. It bothers me that sometimes I don’t know
exactly what the teacher is saying in
Spanish, even though I understand the
general idea. (I)

3. When I write Spanish compositions, I don’t
like the fact that I can’t always express my
idea exactly. (I)

4. I find it kind of frustrating that it’s
sometimes hard to pin down the meaning
of Spanish grammar. (I)
5. I don’t like the feeling that my Spanish pronunciation may not be quite right. (I)
6. I enjoy reading something in Spanish that
takes a while to figure out completely. (T)
7. It bothers me that even when I study
Spanish grammar, some of it is hard to really understand. (I)

3. When I’m writing in Spanish, I don’t like
the fact that I can’t say just what I want. (I)

9. When I’m speaking in Spanish, I don’t really worry about not being able to say what
I mean. (T)
10.It bothers me when the teacher uses a
Spanish word I don’t know. (I)
11. I don’t like the fact that it’s often impossi-

ble to find Spanish words that mean exactly
the same as some English words. (I)
12. I wish I could pronounce Spanish words

the way they should be pronounced. (I)

*I = intolerance, T= tolerance; “I” items
were negative on the scale; items were interspersed in a larger questionnaire.

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications

